
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? 
Dear Mr. Stevens, 
This is the chief editor of Novel Flash Fiction. As you 
were informed by our staff last week, your short story will be 
published in the December issue of Novel Flash Fiction. We 
thought hearing how you came up with your story would be 
meaningful to our readers. We would thus like to ask if you 
could give a speech about your writing process. This speech 
is expected to last for about an hour, and it will take place at 
Star Bookstore downtown. You can choose a specific date 
and time depending on your schedule. If you have any 
questions, please contact us by e-mail at editors@nff.com. 
We look forward to hearing how you wrote your story. 
Sincerely, 
Susanna Martinez
① 소설 창작 과정에 관한 강연을 요청하려고
② 강연 일정이 변경된 것에 대해 사과하려고 
③ 새로 발간된 잡지의 정기 구독을 권유하려고
④ 출판물 편집에 관한 유의 사항을 안내하려고
⑤ 잘못된 기사 내용에 대해 정정을 요구하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Kate의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은? 
Sipping coffee leisurely at a café, Kate was enjoying the 
view of the Ponte Vecchio across the Arno. As an architect 
and professor, she had taught about the historical significance 
of the bridge to her students for years. A smile crept across 
her face. It was her first time to actually see it in person. 
Though not as old as the bridges of Rome, it was absolutely a 
work of art. If the fleeing Nazis had destroyed it during World 
War II, she would have never seen it. She was happy that she 
could view the bridge in the twilight. Free from her daily 
concerns, her mind began to wander from the unforgettable 
views of the still Arno to all the unexpected but pleasant 
encounters with other tourists. The trip was a rare liberating 
experience. Kate felt that all her concerns had melted away. 
① anxious and envious
② bored and indifferent
③ pleased and relaxed
④ confused and puzzled
⑤ disappointed and regretful
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Sure, we’ve all heard the advice: “Follow your passion.” It’s 
great when you hit the jackpot and find a career that melds your 
strengths and passions, and where there is demand in the highly 
competitive global marketplace of today. But if your goal is to get 
a job at the end of the rainbow, you must distinguish between your 
major, your passions, your strengths, and your career path. Your 
strengths are more important than your passions. Studies show 
that the best career choices tend to be grounded in things you’re 
good at, more so than your interests and passions. Ideally, you want 
to find a convergence of your strengths and your values with a 
career path that is in demand. Interests can come and go. Your 
strengths are your core, your hard-wired assets.
* meld: 섞다  ** convergence: 합류점
① 진로 계획을 세울 때 시장의 수요를 정확히 예측해야 한다.
② 직업을 선택할 때 본인의 강점을 우선적으로 고려해야 한다.
③ 자신의 분야에서 성공하기 위해서는 열정을 가져야 한다.
④ 원하는 직업을 갖기 위해서는 전공을 잘 선택해야 한다.
⑤ 취업을 준비할 때 다른 사람의 조언을 잘 들어야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Parents are quick to inform friends and relatives as soon as 
their infant holds her head up, reaches for objects, sits by 
herself, and walks alone. Parental enthusiasm for these motor 
accomplishments is not at all misplaced, for they are, indeed, 
milestones of development. With each additional skill, babies 
gain control over their bodies and the environment in a new 
way. Infants who are able to sit alone are granted an entirely 
different perspective on the world than are those who spend 
much of their day on their backs or stomachs. Coordinated 
reaching opens up a whole new avenue for exploration of 
objects, and when babies can move about, their opportunities 
for independent exploration and manipulation are multiplied. 
No longer are they restricted to their immediate locale and to 
objects that others place before them. As new ways of 
controlling the environment are achieved, motor development 
provides the infant with a growing sense of competence and 
mastery, and it contributes in important ways to the infant’s 
perceptual and cognitive understanding of the world. 
* locale: 현장, 장소
① 유아의 운동 능력 발달은 유아의 다른 발달에 기여한다.
② 부모와의 정서적 교감은 유아의 지적 호기심을 자극한다.
③ 부모의 관심은 유아의 균형 있는 신체 발달에 필수적이다.
④ 주변 환경의 변화는 유아기 운동 능력 발달을 촉진한다.
⑤ 유아는 시행착오를 통해 공간 지각 능력을 발달시킨다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
It is a strategic and tactical mistake to give an offensive 
position away to those who will use it to attack, criticize, and 
blame. Since opponents will undoubtedly attack, criticize, and 
blame, anyway, the advantages of being proactive, airing one’s 
own “dirty laundry,” and “telling on oneself” are too significant 
to ignore. Chief among these advantages is the ability to control 
the first messages and how a story is first framed. That leaves 
others having to respond to you instead of the other way around. 
This approach is appropriately termed “stealing thunder.” 
When an organization steals thunder, it breaks the news about 
its own crisis before the crisis is discovered by the media or 
other interested parties. In experimental research by Arpan and 
Roskos-Ewoldsen, stealing thunder in a crisis situation, as 
opposed to allowing the information to be first disclosed by 
another party, resulted in substantially higher credibility 
ratings. As significant, the authors found that “credibility 
ratings associated with stealing thunder directly predicted 
perceptions of the crisis as less severe.” 
* dirty laundry: 치부, 수치스러운 일
① necessity of being cooperative in a crisis situation
② importance of taking the initiative in managing a crisis
③ problem of creating false stories to save an organization
④ significance of remaining silent in strengthening credibility
⑤ advantage of improving the corporate image through media
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
If you’ve ever seen the bank of flashing screens at a 
broker’s desk, you have a sense of the information overload 
they are up against. When deciding whether to invest in a 
company, for example, they may take into account the people 
at the helm; the current and potential size of its market; net 
profits; and its past, present, and future stock value, among 
other pieces of information. Weighing all of these factors can 
take up so much of your working memory that it becomes 
overwhelmed. Think of having piles and piles of papers, 
sticky notes, and spreadsheets strewn about your desk, and 
you get a picture of what’s going on inside the brain. When 
information overloads working memory this way, it can make 
brokers ― and the rest of us ― scrap all the strategizing and 
analyses and go for emotional, or gut, decisions.
* at the helm: 실권을 가진  ** strewn: 표면을 뒤덮은
① How Information Overload Can Cloud Your Judgment
② Multitasking Increases Your Working Memory!
③ How to Prevent Information Flood 
④ Do Flashing Screens Reduce Information Overload?
⑤ Emotional Judgment: The Secret of Successful Brokers
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? 
The above graph shows direct expenditures on education as a 
percentage of GDP for the five OECD countries with the 
highest percentages in 2011, by level of education. ① All the 
five countries spent over seven percent of their GDP on direct 
expenditures on education for all institutions combined. ② Of 
the five countries, Denmark spent the highest percentage of GDP 
for all institutions combined. ③ In terms of direct expenditures 
on elementary and secondary education, New Zealand spent 
the highest percentage of GDP among the five countries. ④ As 
for direct expenditures on postsecondary education, Iceland 
spent a higher percentage of GDP than the other four countries.
⑤ Compared with the Republic of Korea, Israel spent a lower 
percentage of GDP on postsecondary education.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. Albert C. Barnes에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Born into a working-class family in 1872, Albert C. Barnes 
grew up in Philadelphia. He became interested in art when he 
became friends with future artist William Glackens in high 
school. He earned a medical degree from the University of 
Pennsylvania and qualified as a doctor in 1892. Barnes 
decided not to work as a doctor, and after further study he 
entered the business world. In 1901, he invented the antiseptic 
Argyrol with a German chemist and made a fortune. Using his 
wealth, he began purchasing hundreds of paintings. In 1922, 
he established the Barnes Foundation to promote the education 
of fine arts. There he displayed his huge collection without 
detailed explanation. He died in a car accident in 1951.
* antiseptic: 소독제, 방부제
① 1872년에 태어나 Philadelphia에서 성장했다. 
② University of Pennsylvania에서 의학 학위를 받았다.
③ 독일인 화학자와 함께 Argyrol을 발명하였다.
④ 미술 교육을 장려하기 위해 Barnes Foundation을 설립했다. 
⑤ 자세한 설명과 함께 소장품을 전시했다.
26. Mountaintop Yodeling Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
일치하지 않는 것은?
Mountaintop Yodeling Contest
Show off your yodeling skills with the backdrop of the 
beautiful Alps.
∙Place: special outdoor stage set up at Mt. Billatus (2,545 m)
∙Time & Date: 2:00 p.m. on June 12, 2017
∙Registration (online only): until June 1 (www.yodel.net)
∙Requirements 
- All contestants should sing a 2-minute yodel of their choice.
- All yodels should be sung either in French or in English.
∙Prizes
- 1st place: a round-trip airplane ticket to London
- 2nd place: a Swiss watch 
* The contest will be canceled if the weather is unfavorable.
① Mt. Billatus에 설치된 특별 야외무대에서 열린다. 
② 등록 기한은 6월 1일까지이다.
③ 프랑스어나 영어로 요들을 불러야 한다. 
④ 2등 상품은 London 왕복 항공권이다. 
⑤ 날씨가 좋지 않으면 취소된다.
27. Summerville Forest Trail Tour에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
일치하는 것은?
Summerville Forest Trail Tour
Just five miles away from the big city, you can enjoy 
the huge variety of plants and wildlife at Summerville 
Forest. We offer a trail tour every Saturday from June to 
September. Come and join us!
Tickets
∙$10 (for 8 and older)
∙$5
(for children under 8)
* Snacks and water will be provided.
Tour Schedule
∙8:30 a.m.－9:00 a.m. Introduction to Summerville Forest
∙9:00a.m.－11:00 a.m. Trail Walking Tour
Reservations should be made online (www.summerville.net) 
at least one week in advance of your visit.
① 6월부터 9월까지 매주 일요일에 진행된다.
② 8세 미만 아이들은 무료로 참가할 수 있다.
③ 간식과 물이 제공된다.
④ Summerville Forest에 대한 소개가 한 시간 동안 진행된다.
⑤ 온라인 예약은 방문 하루 전까지 해야 한다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Though most bees fill their days visiting flowers and 
collecting pollen, some bees take advantage of the hard 
work of others. These thieving bees sneak into the nest of an 
① unsuspecting “normal” bee (known as the host), lay an egg 
near the pollen mass being gathered by the host bee for her 
own offspring, and then sneak back out. When the egg of the 
thief hatches, it kills the host’s offspring and then eats the 
pollen meant for ② its victim. Sometimes called brood 
parasites, these bees are also referred to as cuckoo bees, 
because they are similar to cuckoo birds, which lay an egg in 
the nest of another bird and ③ leaves it for that bird to raise. 
They are more ④ technically called cleptoparasites. Clepto 
means “thief” in Greek, and the term cleptoparasite refers 
specifically to an organism ⑤ that lives off another by 
stealing its food. In this case the cleptoparasite feeds on the 
host’s hard-earned pollen stores.
* brood parasite: (알을 대신 기르도록 하는) 탁란 동물
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 
적절한 것은? [3점]
Some coaches erroneously believe that mental skills 
training (MST) can only help perfect the performance of 
highly skilled competitors. As a result, they shy away from 
MST, (A) denying / rationalizing that because they are not 
coaching elite athletes, mental skills training is less important. 
It is true that mental skills become increasingly important at 
high levels of competition. As athletes move up the competitive 
ladder, they become more homogeneous in terms of physical 
skills. In fact, at high levels of competition, all athletes have 
the physical skills to be successful. Consequently, any small 
difference in (B) physical / mental factors can play a huge 
role in determining performance outcomes. However, we can 
anticipate that personal growth and performance will progress 
faster in young, developing athletes who are given mental 
skills training than in athletes not exposed to MST. In fact, the 
optimal time for introducing MST may be when athletes are 
first beginning their sport. Introducing MST (C) early / later 
in athletes’ careers may lay the foundation that will help them 
develop to their full potential.
* homogeneous: 동질적인  ** optimal: 최적의 
(A)
(B)
(C)
① denying
…… physical …… later
② denying
…… mental
…… early
③ rationalizing …… physical …… early
④ rationalizing …… physical …… later
⑤ rationalizing …… mental
…… early
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은? 
Medicine became big business with the expansion of new, 
higher-cost treatments and the increased numbers of health 
care providers in the United States. As more health care 
providers entered the market, competition increased among 
①them. Interestingly, the increase in competition led health 
care providers to recommend more services to the persons 
②they served. This phenomenon reflects a unique feature in 
the health care industry ― provider-induced demand, which 
allows health care providers to maintain ③their income even 
as competition increases. Average consumers of health care 
do not know how to diagnose ④ their medical conditions and 
do not have a license to order services or prescribe 
medications. So consumers rely on the knowledge of health 
care providers to determine what services are needed, even 
though ⑤ they stand to make more money by ordering more 
services.
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Interest in extremely long periods of time sets geology and 
astronomy apart from other sciences. Geologists think in 
terms of billions of years for the age of Earth and its oldest 
rocks ― numbers that, like the national debt, are not easily 
comprehended. Nevertheless, the
 
are important for environmental geologists because they 
provide a way to measure human impacts on the natural 
world. For example, we would like to know the rate of natural 
soil formation from solid rock to determine whether topsoil 
erosion from agriculture is too great. Likewise, understanding 
how climate has changed over millions of years is vital to 
properly assess current global warming trends. Clues to past 
environmental change are well preserved in many different 
kinds of rocks.
① time scales of geological activity
② global patterns in species diversity 
③ regional differences in time perception
④ statistical methods for climate projections 
⑤ criticisms of geological period classifications
32. Politics cannot be suppressed, whichever policy process is 
employed and however sensitive and respectful of differences 
it might be. In other words, there is no end to politics. It is 
wrong to think that proper institutions, knowledge, methods 
of consultation, or participatory mechanisms can make 
disagreement go away. Theories of all sorts promote the view 
that there are ways by which disagreement can be processed 
or managed so as to make it disappear. The assumption 
behind those theories is that disagreement is wrong and 
consensus is the desirable state of things. In fact, consensus 
rarely comes without some forms of subtle coercion and the 
absence of fear in expressing a disagreement is a source of 
genuine freedom. Debates cause disagreements to evolve, 
often for the better, but a positively evolving debate does not 
have to equal a reduction in disagreement. The suppression of 
disagreement should never be made into a goal in political 
deliberation. A defense is required against any suggestion that 
. [3점]
* consensus: 합의  ** coercion: 강압
① political development results from the freedom of speech
② political disagreement is not the normal state of things
③ politics should not restrict any form of difference
④ freedom could be achieved only through tolerance
⑤ suppression could never be a desirable tool in politics 
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. To make plans for the future, the brain must have an ability 
to take certain elements of prior experiences and reconfigure 
them in a way that does not copy any actual past experience or 
present reality exactly. To accomplish that, the organism must 
go beyond the mere ability to form internal representations, 
the models of the world outside. It must acquire the ability to 
. We can argue that 
tool-making, one of the fundamental distinguishing features of 
primate cognition, depends on this ability, since a tool does 
not exist in a ready-made form in the natural environment and 
has to be imagined in order to be made. The neural machinery 
for creating and holding ‘images of the future’ was a 
necessary prerequisite for tool-making, and thus for launching 
human civilization. [3점]
① mirror accurate images of the world outside 
② manipulate and transform these models
③ visualize the present reality as it is
④ bring the models back from memory
⑤ identify and reproduce past experiences faithfully
34. Since life began in the oceans, most life, including freshwater 
life, has a chemical composition more like the ocean than fresh 
water. It appears that most freshwater life did not originate in fresh 
water, but is secondarily adapted, having passed from ocean to 
land and then back again to fresh water. As improbable as this 
may seem, the bodily fluids of aquatic animals show a strong 
similarity to oceans, and indeed, most studies of ion balance in 
freshwater physiology document the complex regulatory 
mechanisms by which fish, amphibians and invertebrates 
attempt to 
. 
It is these sorts of unexpected complexities and apparent 
contradictions that make ecology so interesting. The idea of a 
fish in a freshwater lake struggling to accumulate salts inside 
its body to mimic the ocean reminds one of the other great 
contradiction of the biosphere: plants are bathed in an 
atmosphere composed of roughly three-quarters nitrogen, yet 
their growth is frequently restricted by lack of nitrogen. [3점]
* amphibian: 양서류  ** invertebrate: 무척추동물
① maintain an inner ocean in spite of surrounding fresh water
② attain ion balance by removing salts from inside their body
③ return to the ocean to escape from their natural enemies
④ rebuild their external environment to obtain resources
⑤ change their physiology in accord with their surroundings
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Since the concept of a teddy bear is very obviously not a 
genetically inherited trait, we can be confident that we are 
looking at a cultural trait. However, it is a cultural trait that 
seems to be under the guidance of another, genuinely 
biological trait: the cues that attract us to babies (high 
foreheads and small faces). ① Cute, baby-like features are 
inherently appealing, producing a nurturing response in most 
humans. ② Teddy bears that had a more baby-like appearance
― however slight this may have been initially ― were thus 
more popular with customers. ③ Teddy bear manufacturers 
obviously noticed which bears were selling best and so made 
more of these and fewer of the less popular models, to 
maximize their profits. ④ As a result, using animal images 
for commercial purposes was faced with severe criticism from 
animal rights activists. ⑤ In this way, the selection pressure 
built up by the customers resulted in the evolution of a more 
baby-like bear by the manufacturers.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
It takes time to develop and launch products. Consequently, 
many companies know 6—12 months ahead of time that 
they will be launching a new product. 
(A) This marketing technique is called demand creation. It 
involves creating a buzz about a new potentially 
revolutionary nutrient or training technique through 
publishing articles and/or books that stimulate the 
reader’s interest. Once this is done, a new product is 
launched.
(B) Over a series of issues, you begin to see more articles 
discussing this new nutrient and potential to enhance 
training and/or performance. Then, after 4—6 months, a 
new product is coincidentally launched that contains the 
ingredient that has been discussed in previous issues. 
Books and supplement reviews have also been used as 
vehicles to promote the sale of fitness and nutrition 
products.
(C) In order to create interest in the product, companies will 
often launch pre-market advertising campaigns. In the 
nutrition industry, articles are often written discussing a 
new nutrient under investigation.
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
There’s a direct counterpart to pop music in the classical 
song, more commonly called an “art song,” which does 
not focus on the development of melodic material. 
(A) But the pop song will rarely be sung and played exactly 
as written; the singer is apt to embellish that vocal line to 
give it a “styling,” just as the accompanist will fill out the 
piano part to make it more interesting and personal. The 
performers might change the original tempo and mood 
completely. 
(B) Both the pop song and the art song tend to follow 
tried-and-true structural patterns. And both will be 
published in the same way ― with a vocal line and a 
basic piano part written out underneath.
(C) You won’t find such extremes of approach by the performers 
of songs by Franz Schubert or Richard Strauss. These will 
be performed note for note because both the vocal and 
piano parts have been painstakingly written down by the 
composer with an ear for how each relates to the other. [3점]
* embellish:  꾸미다  ** tried-and-true: 유효성이 증명된
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
적절한 곳을 고르시오. 
38.
The net effect of this was that, although customers 
benefited, the banks lost out as their costs increased but 
the total number of customers stayed the same.
In mature markets, breakthroughs that lead to a major 
change in competitive positions and to the growth of the 
market are rare. ( ① ) Because of this, competition becomes 
a zero sum game in which one organization can only win at 
the expense of others. ( ② ) However, where the degree of 
competition is particularly intense a zero sum game can 
quickly become a negative sum game, in that everyone in the 
market is faced with additional costs. ( ③ ) As an example 
of this, when one of the major high street banks in Britain 
tried to gain a competitive advantage by opening on Saturday 
mornings, it attracted a number of new customers who found 
the traditional Monday-Friday bank opening hours to be a 
constraint. ( ④ ) However, faced with a loss of customers, 
the competition responded by opening on Saturdays as 
well. ( ⑤ ) In essence, this proved to be a negative sum 
game. 
39.
Human beings discovered this art thousands of years ago, and 
they have invented several devices to make it easier and faster.
In fiber processing the word ‘spinning’ means two quite 
different things. ( ① ) One is the formation of individual 
fibers by squeezing a liquid through one or more small openings 
in a nozzle called a spinneret and letting it harden. ( ② ) Spiders 
and silkworms have been spinning fibers in this way for millions 
of years, but chemists and engineers learned the procedure from 
them only about a century ago. ( ③ ) In the other kind of 
spinning ― sometimes called throwing to prevent confusion 
with the first kind ― two or more fibers are twisted together to 
form a thread. ( ④ ) The ancient distaff and spindle are 
examples that were replaced by the spinning wheel in the Middle 
Ages. ( ⑤ ) Later came the spinning jenny, the water frame, 
and Crompton’s mule ― spinning machines that became 
symbols of the Industrial Revolution. [3점]
* distaff and spindle: 실을 감는 막대와 추
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), 
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
When considered in terms of evolutionary success, many 
of the seemingly irrational choices that people make do not 
seem so foolish after all. Most animals, including our 
ancestors and modern-day capuchin monkeys, lived very 
close to the margin of survival. Paleontologists who study 
early human civilizations have uncovered evidence that our 
ancestors faced frequent periods of drought and freezing. 
When you are living on the verge of starvation, a slight 
downturn in your food reserves makes a lot more difference 
than a slight upturn. Anthropologists who study people still 
living in hunter-gatherer societies have discovered that they 
regularly make choices designed to produce not the best 
opportunity for obtaining a hyperabundant supply of food but, 
instead, the least danger of ending up with an insufficient 
supply. In other words, people everywhere have a strong 
motivation to avoid falling below the level that will feed 
themselves and their families. If our ancestors hadn’t 
agonized over losses and instead had taken too many chances 
in going after the big gains, they’d have been more likely to 
lose out and never become anyone’s ancestor.
* agonize: 괴로워하다, 고민하다
󰀻
Our ancestors gave priority to
(A)
minimum 
resources rather than pursuing maximum gains, and that 
was the rational choice for human
(B)
 from an 
evolutionary perspective. 
(A)
(B)
① securing
…… freedom
② sharing
…… interaction
③ identifying …… exploration
④ sharing
…… prosperity
⑤ securing
…… survival
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
According to many sociologists, the study of what our 
society calls ‘art’ can only really progress if we drop the 
highly specific and ideologically loaded terminology of ‘art’, 
‘artworks’ and ‘artists’, and replace these with the more 
neutral and less historically specific terms ‘cultural forms’, 
‘cultural products’ and ‘cultural producers’. These cultural 
products ― be they paintings, sculptures, forms of music or 
whatever ― should be regarded as being made by certain 
types of cultural producer, and as being used by particular 
groups of people in particular ways in specific social 
contexts. By using the more neutral term ‘cultural products’ 
for particular objects, and ‘cultural producers’ for the people 
who make those objects, the sociologist seeks to break with a 
view that she/he sees as having dominated the study of 
cultural forms for too long, namely trying to understand 
everything in terms of the category ‘art’. This is a category 
that is too limited and context-specific to encompass all the 
different cultural products that people in different societies 
make and use. It is a term that is also too loaded to take at face 
value and to use naively in study of our own society. Since it 
is in the interests of certain social groups to define some 
things as ‘art’ and others as not, the very term ‘art’ itself 
cannot be uncritically used by the sociologist who wishes to 
understand how and why such labelling processes occur. 
Quite simply, then, in order to study cultural matters, many 
sociologists believe one has to 
 the terms ‘art’, 
‘artwork’ and ‘artist’ as the basis for our analysis. Instead, 
these terms become important objects of analysis themselves.
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Art: A Means to Overcome a Cultural Gap
② Interpreting Culture In and Out of Context
③ Different Forms of Art in the World of Culture
④ Cultural Diversity: Cornerstones of Civilizations
⑤ Culture as a Basis of Understanding the Concept of Art
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① reject
② borrow
③ introduce
④ stress
⑤ revive
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Andrew steadied his eyes upon the black and white 
squares. He thought awhile before pushing his knight to an 
unbeatable position. Now Andrew was sure he had beaten 
Timothy Tandon, the winner of the 2016 National Chess 
Championship. Andrew, whom nobody had noticed before 
the tournament this year, came to progress to the final match. 
After enjoying this memorable victory, Andrew headed straight 
to the nursing home where (a) his sick grandad was staying.
(B)
It was the day of the final match. That morning Andrew had 
received a call from the nursing home informing him that 
Grandad’s condition had become serious. The news played 
upon Andrew’s mind as (b) he started to play. After several 
fierce battles, Andrew’s concentration wavered for a moment. 
His mind travelled to his grandad, who was in another battle 
for his life. It was then that Andrew made a big mistake! The 
mistake was a fatal one, and it was all over. (c) He had lost.
(C)
Andrew arrived at the nursing home in a gloomy mood, but 
he was blessed with good news. His grandad was recovering. 
Andrew was greatly delighted, but (d) he could not help being 
disappointed in a corner of his mind. “I tried my best to fulfill 
your dream but I couldn’t make it,” Andrew said in 
disappointment. “That’s all right,” said Grandad. “The real 
lesson of chess is learning how to tame your mind. See, my 
mind has won the battle over my body. I will recover soon and 
see you become champion one day in perfect health.” Andrew 
was relieved and smiled with joy.
(D)
When Andrew reached the nursing home, Grandad was 
sitting up in bed. “You won the semi-final?” (e) he asked, 
offering up a weak smile. Andrew nodded his head. Indeed, 
Andrew’s grandad was his chess master. As a kid, Andrew 
liked to observe Grandad play chess and often predicted his 
moves even before he began to move the pieces. “Andrew,” 
said Grandad, inspired by his grandson’s superb victory, “you 
are now all set to fulfill my dream. Tomorrow you will surely 
win the National Chess Championship.”
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)
② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 Andrew에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 2016 National Chess Championship 우승자에게 승리를 거두었다.
② 할아버지의 병세에 관한 전화를 받고 결승전에서 큰 실수를 했다.
③ 결승전에서 패배한 사실을 할아버지에게 알리지 않았다. 
④ 할아버지로부터 체스가 주는 교훈에 관하여 들었다. 
⑤ 어렸을 때 할아버지의 체스 게임을 즐겨 봤다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
