
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
To whom it may concern,
My name is Daniel. Since I joined your youth sports program 
several years ago, I have really enjoyed swimming. Thanks to 
your program, I have become a good swimmer. Now I want 
to go one step further. I like helping people and hope to get a 
job as a lifeguard later. So I tried to sign up for your lifeguard 
training course this summer. But the course was so popular that 
the registration closed almost as soon as it opened. I couldn’t 
register and was really disappointed. I heard some of my 
friends couldn’t, either. I’m kindly asking you to open an 
additional course. I appreciate your consideration.
Sincerely,
Daniel Smith
① 구조원 양성 과정의 추가 개설을 요청하려고
② 구조원 양성 과정의 우수성을 홍보하려고
③ 동계 수영 강습 프로그램 수강을 신청하려고
④ 수영 강사 일자리가 있는지 문의하려고
⑤ 구조원 양성 과정의 등록 방법을 안내하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Sharon의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
Sharon received a ticket to an upcoming tango concert from her 
friend. While surfing the Internet, she came across a review for 
the concert. The reviewer was harsh, calling it “an awful 
performance.” That raised in Sharon’s mind the question of 
whether it was worthwhile to go, but in the end, she reluctantly 
decided to attend the concert. The hall located in the old town was 
ancient and run-down. Looking around, Sharon again wondered 
what kind of show she could expect. But as soon as the tango 
started, everything changed. The piano, guitar, flute, and violin 
magically flew out in harmony. The audience cheered. “Oh my 
goodness! What fantastic music!” Sharon shouted. The rhythm 
and tempo were so energetic and sensational that they shook her 
body and soul. The concert was far beyond her expectations.
① excited → bored
② doubtful → amazed
③ calm
→ upset
④ ashamed → grateful
⑤ envious → indifferent 
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? 
Occasionally individuals do not merely come out as well as 
clearly state what is troubling them and instead select more 
indirect means of expressing their annoyance. One companion 
might talk to the various other in a way that is condescending 
and also indicates underlying hostility. Numerous other times, 
partners may mope and even frown without genuinely dealing 
with an issue. Companions may likewise merely prevent 
discussing an issue by swiftly switching over topics when the 
subject turns up or by being incredibly vague. Such indirect 
ways of expressing temper are not useful since they don’t 
provide the individual that is the target of the behaviors, an 
idea of exactly how to react. They understand their companion 
is irritated, but the absence of directness leaves them without 
advice regarding what they can do to solve the issue.
* condescend: 거들먹거리다  ** mope: 울적해하다
① 이성보다 감정에 호소하여 상대방을 설득해야 한다.
② 상대방의 기분을 상하게 하는 행동을 자제해야 한다. 
③ 문제 해결을 위해서는 문제를 직접적으로 언급해야 한다.
④ 타인의 입장을 이해하려면 경청하는 자세를 가져야 한다.
⑤ 목표 달성을 방해하는 문제점을 지속적으로 파악해야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
21. 밑줄 친 journey edges가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 
적절한 것은? [3점]
Many ancillary businesses that today seem almost core at one 
time started out as journey edges. For example, retailers often 
boost sales with accompanying support such as assembly or 
installation services. Think of a home goods retailer selling an 
unassembled outdoor grill as a box of parts and leaving its 
customer’s mission incomplete. When that retailer also sells 
assembly and delivery, it takes another step in the journey to the 
customer’s true mission of cooking in his backyard. Another 
example is the business-to-business service contracts that are 
layered on top of software sales. Maintenance, installation, 
training, delivery, anything at all that turns do-it-yourself into a 
do-it-for-me solution originally resulted from exploring the 
edge of where core products intersect with customer journeys.
* ancillary: 보조의, 부차적인  ** intersect: 교차하다
① requiring customers to purchase unnecessary goods
② decreasing customers’ dependence on business services
③ focusing more on selling end products than components
④ adding a technological breakthrough to their core products
⑤ providing extra services beyond customers’ primary purchase
22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Official definitions of sport have important implications. 
When a definition emphasizes rules, competition, and high 
performance, many people will be excluded from participation or 
avoid other physical activities that are defined as “second class.” 
For example, when a 12-year-old is cut from an exclusive club 
soccer team, she may not want to play in the local league because 
she sees it as “recreational activity” rather than a real sport. This 
can create a situation in which most people are physically 
inactive at the same time that a small number of people perform 
at relatively high levels for large numbers of fans ― a situation 
that negatively impacts health and increases health-care costs in 
a society or community. When sport is defined to include a wide 
range of physical activities that are played for pleasure and 
integrated into local expressions of social life, physical activity 
rates will be high and overall health benefits are likely.
① 운동선수의 기량은 경기 자체를 즐길 때 향상된다.
② 공정한 승부를 위해 합리적인 경기 규칙이 필요하다.
③ 스포츠의 대중화는 스포츠 산업의 정의를 바꾸고 있다.
④ 스포츠의 정의는 신체 활동 참여와 건강에 영향을 미친다.
⑤ 활발한 여가 활동은 원만한 대인 관계 유지에 도움이 된다.
23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Problem framing amounts to defining what problem you are 
proposing to solve. This is a critical activity because the frame 
you choose strongly influences your understanding of the 
problem, thereby conditioning your approach to solving it. For an 
illustration, consider Thibodeau and Broditsky’s series of 
experiments in which they asked people for ways to reduce crime 
in a community. They found that the respondents’ suggestions 
changed significantly depending on whether the metaphor used 
to describe crime was as a virus or as a beast. People presented 
with a metaphor comparing crime to a virus invading their city 
emphasized prevention and addressing the root causes of the 
problem, such as eliminating poverty and improving education. 
On the other hand, people presented with the beast metaphor 
focused on remediations: increasing the size of the police force 
and prisons. 
① importance of asking the right questions for better solutions 
② difficulty of using a metaphor to find solutions to a problem
③ reasons why problem framing prevents solutions from appearing
④ usefulness of preventive measures in reducing community crime
⑤ effect of problem framing on approaching and solving problems
24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
A common error in current Darwinian thinking is the 
assumption that “selfish genes” are the prime mover in 
evolution. In strict Darwinism the prime mover is environmental 
threat. In the absence of threat, natural selection tends to resist 
change. It is un-biological to “explain” behavioural change as 
resulting from genetic change or the ex vacuo emergence of 
domain-specific brain modules. Evolutionary psychologists 
surely know why brains evolved: as Cosmides and Tooby point 
out, brains are found only in animals that move. Brains are 
behavioural organs, and behavioural adaptation, being immediate 
and non-random, is vastly more efficient than genetic adaptation. 
So, in animals with brains, behavioural change is the usual first 
response to environmental threat. If the change is successful, 
genetic adaptation to the new behaviour will follow more 
gradually. Animals do not evolve carnivore teeth and then decide 
it might be a good idea to eat meat.
* ex vacuo: 무(無)에서의  ** carnivore: 육식 동물
① Which Adapts First, Behaviour or Genes?
② The Brain Under Control of Selfish Genes
③ Why Animals Eat Meat: A Story of Survival
④ Genes Always Win the Battle Against Nature!
⑤ The Superior Efficiency of Genetic Adaptation
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Global Plastic Waste Generation by Industry in 2015
Market Sectors
Million Tons
%
Packaging
141
46.69
Textiles
38
12.58
Consumer and Institutional Products
37
12.25
Transportation
17
5.63
Electrical and Electronic
13
4.30
Building and Construction
13
4.30
Industrial Machinery
1
0.33
Others
42
13.91
Total
302
100
Note: Due to rounding, the percentages may not sum to 100%.
The above table shows global plastic waste generation by 
industry in 2015. ① The sector that generated plastic waste 
most was packaging, accounting for 46.69% of all plastic 
waste generated. ② The textiles sector generated 38 million 
tons of plastic waste, or 12.58% of the total plastic waste 
generated. ③ The consumer and institutional products sector 
generated 37 million tons of plastic waste, and the amount was 
more than twice that of plastic waste the transportation sector 
generated. ④ The electrical and electronic sector generated 
just as much plastic waste as the building and construction 
sector did, each sector accounting for 8.60% of the total plastic 
waste generation. ⑤ Only one million tons of plastic waste 
were generated in the industrial machinery sector, representing 
less than 0.50% of the total plastic waste generated.
26. William McDougall에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 
것은?
Born in Lancashire, England, in 1871, William McDougall 
left his mark on experimental and physiological psychology. 
After receiving a degree in natural sciences in Cambridge 
University, he became interested in human behavior. He 
believed human behavior to be based on three abilities ―
intellect, emotion, and will. Being a hardworking scholar, he 
held academic positions in several universities in England. He 
also wrote many books on psychology including the well-known 
Introduction to Social Psychology. In 1920, he published The 
Group Mind opposing mechanistic interpretations of human 
behavior. However, The Group Mind was poorly received when 
published. Somewhat disappointed, he moved to the United 
States in the same year to be a professor at Harvard University. 
Seven years later, he moved to Duke University, where he 
developed a psychology department and continued various 
research. Today many people read his books, and psychologists 
celebrate his intellectual achievements.
① Cambridge University에서 학위를 받았다. 
② 인간 행동이 세 가지 능력에 근거한다고 믿었다.
③ The Group Mind는 출판되었을 때 매우 인정받았다.
④ Duke University에서 다양한 연구를 계속하였다.
⑤ 오늘날 심리학자들은 그의 지적 업적을 기린다.
27. Singing Tommy 사용에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 
않는 것은?
Singing Tommy
Congratulations! Tommy is now your singing friend. Read 
these instructions to learn how to play with and care for him. 
Tommy sings to you anytime, anywhere. An Internet connection 
is not required to play the songs!
Before Use 
1. Remove the protective film covering Tommy’s eyes.
2. Insert two AA batteries into the battery box and press 
the power button.
3. Choose your volume setting: LOW volume or HIGH 
volume. 
Operation
1. Play 
- Touch Tommy’s right ear to start a song.
2. Stop
- Press Tommy’s hat to stop the song.
3. Control
- Choose from five songs. 
- Push Tommy’s badge to skip to the next song.
Caution
Tommy is not waterproof. Be careful not to get Tommy wet!
① 인터넷에 연결되지 않아도 노래를 재생할 수 있다.
② 사용 전에 두 개의 AA 건전지를 넣어야 한다.
③ 모자를 누르면 노래가 시작된다.
④ 다섯 곡의 노래 중에 선택할 수 있다.
⑤ 방수가 되지 않는다.
28. 2020 Crime & Spy Science Workshop에 관한 다음 안내문의 
내용과 일치하는 것은?
2020 Crime & Spy Science Workshop
Come learn to be a top detective! In this workshop, you 
will investigate crime scenes and learn skills necessary to 
become a detective and solve mysteries!
When & Where
∙9 a.m. to 3 p.m. on Tuesday, August 18, 2020 
∙Conference Room #103, ZBU Student Union
Who: Ages 14 and up
Participation Fee: $20 (insurance not included)
Registration
∙Call 555-540-0421, or email spyscience@zbu.edu 
by Wednesday, July 29, 2020.
Preparations
∙Bring comfortable shoes and a bag to carry detective tools.
∙Lunch and snacks are provided.
You will learn
∙how to find traces of suspects.
∙how to manage the scene of a crime.
∙how to choose the right tools.
① 이틀 동안 진행된다.
② 참가비에 보험이 포함되어 있다.
③ 등록은 이메일로만 할 수 있다.
④ 점심과 간식은 제공되지 않는다.
⑤ 적절한 도구를 선택하는 방법을 배울 것이다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
People from more individualistic cultural contexts tend to be 
motivated to maintain self-focused agency or control ① as these 
serve as the basis of one’s self-worth. With this form of agency 
comes the belief that individual successes ② depending primarily 
on one’s own abilities and actions, and thus, whether by influencing 
the environment or trying to accept one’s circumstances, the use 
of control ultimately centers on the individual. The independent 
self may be more ③ driven to cope by appealing to a sense of 
agency or control. However, people from more interdependent 
cultural contexts tend to be less focused on issues of individual 
success and agency and more motivated towards group goals and 
harmony. Research has shown ④ that East Asians prefer to 
receive, but not seek, more social support rather than seek personal 
control in certain cases. Therefore, people ⑤ who hold a more 
interdependent self-construal may prefer to cope in a way that 
promotes harmony in relationships.
* self-construal: 자기 구성
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
않은 것은?
Chunking is vital for cognition of music. If we had to encode 
it in our brains note by note, we’d ① struggle to make sense of 
anything more complex than the simplest children’s songs. Of 
course, most accomplished musicians can play compositions 
containing many thousands of notes entirely from ② memory, 
without a note out of place. But this seemingly awesome 
accomplishment of recall is made ③ improbable by remembering 
the musical process, not the individual notes as such. If you ask 
a pianist to start a Mozart sonata from bar forty-one, she’ll 
probably have to ④ mentally replay the music from the start until 
reaching that bar ― the score is not simply laid out in her mind, 
to be read from any random point. It’s rather like describing how 
you drive to work: you don’t simply recite the names of roads as 
an abstract list, but have to construct your route by mentally 
retracing it. When musicians make a mistake during rehearsal, 
they wind back to the ⑤ start of a musical phrase (‘let’s take it 
from the second verse’) before restarting.
* chunking: 덩어리로 나누기  ** bar: (악보의) 마디
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Research with human runners challenged conventional 
wisdom and found that the ground-reaction forces at the foot 
and the shock transmitted up the leg and through the body 
after impact with the ground 
 as runners 
moved from extremely compliant to extremely hard running 
surfaces. As a result, researchers gradually began to believe 
that runners are subconsciously able to adjust leg stiffness 
prior to foot strike based on their perceptions of the hardness 
or stiffness of the surface on which they are running. This 
view suggests that runners create soft legs that soak up impact 
forces when they are running on very hard surfaces and stiff 
legs when they are moving along on yielding terrain. As a 
result, impact forces passing through the legs are strikingly 
similar over a wide range of running surface types. Contrary to 
popular belief, running on concrete is not more damaging to 
the legs than running on soft sand. [3점]
* compliant: 말랑말랑한  ** terrain: 지형
① varied little
② decreased a lot
③ suddenly peaked 
④ gradually appeared
⑤ were hardly generated 
32. One of the great risks of writing is that even the simplest of 
choices regarding wording or punctuation can sometimes 
 in ways that may 
seem unfair. For example, look again at the old grammar rule 
forbidding the splitting of infinitives. After decades of telling 
students to never split an infinitive (something just done in 
this sentence), most composition experts now acknowledge 
that a split infinitive is not a grammar crime. Suppose you 
have written a position paper trying to convince your city 
council of the need to hire security personnel for the library, 
and half of the council members ― the people you wish to 
convince ― remember their eighth-grade grammar teacher’s 
warning about splitting infinitives. How will they respond 
when you tell them, in your introduction, that librarians are 
compelled “to always accompany” visitors to the rare book 
room because of the threat of damage? How much of their 
attention have you suddenly lost because of their automatic 
recollection of what is now a nonrule? It is possible, in other 
words, to write correctly and still offend your readers’ notions 
of your language competence.
* punctuation: 구두점  ** infinitive: 부정사(不定詞)
① reveal your hidden intention
② distort the meaning of the sentence
③ prejudice your audience against you
④ test your audience’s reading comprehension 
⑤ create fierce debates about your writing topic
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. Even when we do something as apparently simple as picking up 
a screwdriver, our brain automatically 
.
We can literally feel things with the end of the screwdriver. 
When we extend a hand, holding the screwdriver, we 
automatically take the length of the latter into account. We can 
probe difficult-to-reach places with its extended end, and 
comprehend what we are exploring. Furthermore, we instantly 
regard the screwdriver we are holding as “our” screwdriver, and 
get possessive about it. We do the same with the much more 
complex tools we use, in much more complex situations. The 
cars we pilot instantaneously and automatically become 
ourselves. Because of this, when someone bangs his fist on 
our car’s hood after we have irritated him at a crosswalk, we 
take it personally. This is not always reasonable. Nonetheless, 
without the extension of self into machine, it would be 
impossible to drive. [3점]
* probe: 탐색하다
① recalls past experiences of utilizing the tool
② recognizes what it can do best without the tool
③ judges which part of our body can best be used
④ perceives what limits the tool’s functional utility
⑤ adjusts what it considers body to include the tool
34. A large part of what we see is what we expect to see. This 
explains why we “see” faces and figures in a flickering 
campfire, or in moving clouds. This is why Leonardo da Vinci 
advised artists to discover their motifs by staring at patches on 
a blank wall. A fire provides a constant flickering change in 
visual information that never integrates into anything solid and 
thereby allows the brain to engage in a play of hypotheses. On 
the other hand, the wall does not present us with very much in 
the way of visual clues, and so the brain begins to make more 
and more hypotheses and desperately searches for confirmation. 
A crack in the wall looks a little like the profile of a nose and 
suddenly a whole face appears, or a leaping horse, or a 
dancing figure. In cases like these the brain’s visual strategies 
are 
. [3점]
* flicker: 흔들리다
① ignoring distracting information unrelated to visual clues 
② projecting images from within the mind out onto the world
③ categorizing objects into groups either real or imagined
④ strengthening connections between objects in the real world
⑤ removing the broken or missing parts of an original image
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은? 
One of the most widespread, and sadly mistaken, environmental 
myths is that living “close to nature” out in the country or in a 
leafy suburb is the best “green” lifestyle. Cities, on the other 
hand, are often blamed as a major cause of ecological 
destruction ― artificial, crowded places that suck up precious 
resources. Yet, when you look at the facts, nothing could be 
farther from the truth. ① The pattern of life in the country and 
most suburbs involves long hours in the automobile each week, 
burning fuel and pumping out exhaust to get to work, buy 
groceries, and take kids to school and activities. ② City dwellers, 
on the other hand, have the option of walking or taking transit to 
work, shops, and school. ③ The larger yards and houses found 
outside cities also create an environmental cost in terms of 
energy use, water use, and land use. ④ This illustrates the 
tendency that most city dwellers get tired of urban lives and 
decide to settle in the countryside. ⑤ It’s clear that the future of 
the Earth depends on more people gathering together in compact 
communities. 
* compact: 밀집한
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
Studies of people struggling with major health problems 
show that the majority of respondents report they derived 
benefits from their adversity. Stressful events sometimes 
force people to develop new skills, reevaluate priorities, 
learn new insights, and acquire new strengths. 
(A) High levels of adversity predicted poor mental health, as 
expected, but people who had faced intermediate levels of 
adversity were healthier than those who experienced little 
adversity, suggesting that moderate amounts of stress can 
foster resilience. A follow-up study found a similar link 
between the amount of lifetime adversity and subjects’ 
responses to laboratory stressors.
(B) Intermediate levels of adversity were predictive of the greatest 
resilience. Thus, having to deal with a moderate amount of 
stress may build resilience in the face of future stress. 
(C) In other words, the adaptation process initiated by stress 
can lead to personal changes for the better. One study that 
measured participants’ exposure to thirty-seven major 
negative events found a curvilinear relationship between 
lifetime adversity and mental health. 
* resilience: 회복력
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
The fruit ripening process brings about the softening of 
cell walls, sweetening and the production of chemicals that 
give colour and flavour. The process is induced by the 
production of a plant hormone called ethylene. 
(A) If ripening could be slowed down by interfering with 
ethylene production or with the processes that respond to 
ethylene, fruit could be left on the plant until it was ripe 
and full of flavour but would still be in good condition 
when it arrived at the supermarket shelf. 
(B) In some countries they are then sprayed with ethylene 
before sale to the consumer to induce ripening. However, 
fruit picked before it is ripe has less flavour than fruit 
picked ripe from the plant. Biotechnologists therefore saw 
an opportunity in delaying the ripening and softening 
process in fruit.
(C) The problem for growers and retailers is that ripening is 
followed sometimes quite rapidly by deterioration and 
decay and the product becomes worthless. Tomatoes and 
other fruits are, therefore, usually picked and transported 
when they are unripe. [3점]
* deterioration: (품질의) 저하
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
Compounding the difficulty, now more than ever, is what 
ergonomists call information overload, where a leader is 
overrun with inputs ― via e-mails, meetings, and phone 
calls ― that only distract and confuse her thinking. 
 
Clarity is often a difficult thing for a leader to obtain. 
Concerns of the present tend to seem larger than potentially 
greater concerns that lie farther away. ( ① ) Some decisions 
by their nature present great complexity, whose many 
variables must come together a certain way for the leader to 
succeed. ( ② ) Alternatively, the leader’s information might 
be only fragmentary, which might cause her to fill in the gaps 
with assumptions ― sometimes without recognizing them as 
such. ( ③ ) And the merits of a leader’s most important 
decisions, by their nature, typically are not clear-cut. ( ④ ) 
Instead those decisions involve a process of assigning weights 
to competing interests, and then determining, based upon 
some criterion, which one predominates. ( ⑤ ) The result is 
one of judgment, of shades of gray; like saying that Beethoven 
is a better composer than Brahms. [3점]
* ergonomist: 인간 공학자  ** fragmentary: 단편적인
39.  
When the team painted fireflies’ light organs dark, a new 
set of bats took twice as long to learn to avoid them.
Fireflies don’t just light up their behinds to attract mates, 
they also glow to tell bats not to eat them. This twist in the tale 
of the trait that gives fireflies their name was discovered by 
Jesse Barber and his colleagues. The glow’s warning role 
benefits both fireflies and bats, because these insects taste 
disgusting to the mammals. ( ① ) When swallowed, chemicals 
released by fireflies cause bats to throw them back up. ( ② ) 
The team placed eight bats in a dark room with three or four 
fireflies plus three times as many tasty insects, including 
beetles and moths, for four days. ( ③ ) During the first night, 
all the bats captured at least one firefly. ( ④ ) But by the 
fourth night, most bats had learned to avoid fireflies and catch 
all the other prey instead. ( ⑤ ) It had long been thought that 
firefly bioluminescence mainly acted as a mating signal, but 
the new finding explains why firefly larvae also glow despite 
being immature for mating.
* bioluminescence: 생물 발광(發光)  ** larvae: larva(애벌레)의 복수형
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), 
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Some environments are more likely to lead to fossilization 
and subsequent discovery than others. Thus, we cannot 
assume that more fossil evidence from a particular period or 
place means that more individuals were present at that time, 
or in that place. It may just be that the circumstances at one 
period of time, or at one location, were more favourable for 
fossilization than they were at other times, or in other places. 
Likewise, the absence of hominin fossil evidence at a 
particular time or place does not have the same implication as 
its presence. As the saying goes, ‘absence of evidence is not 
evidence of absence’. Similar logic suggests that taxa are 
likely to have arisen before they first appear in the fossil 
record, and they are likely to have survived beyond the time 
of their most recent appearance in the fossil record. Thus, the 
first appearance datum, and the last appearance datum of 
taxa in the hominin fossil record are likely to be conservative 
statements about the times of origin and extinction of a taxon.
* subsequent: 다음의  ** hominin fossil: 인류 화석
*** taxa: taxon(분류군)의 복수형
󰀻
Since fossilization and fossil discovery are affected by 
(A)
 conditions, the fossil evidence of a taxon cannot 
definitely 
(B)
 its population size or the times of its 
appearance and extinction.
(A)
(B)
(A)
(B)
① experimental ……confirm
② experimental ……reveal
③ environmental……clarify
④ environmental……conceal 
⑤ accidental
……mask
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
In many mountain regions, rights of access to water are 
associated with the possession of land ― until recently in the 
Andes, for example, land and water rights were (a) combined 
so water rights were transferred with the land. However, 
through state land reforms and the development of additional 
sources of supply, water rights have become separated from 
land, and may be sold at auction. This therefore (b) favours 
those who can pay, rather than ensuring access to all in the 
community. The situation arises, therefore, where individuals 
may hold land with no water. In Peru, the government grants 
water to communities separately from land, and it is up to 
the community to allocate it. Likewise in Yemen, the 
traditional allocation was one measure (tasah) of water to one 
hundred ‘libnah’ of land. This applied only to traditional 
irrigation supplies ― from runoff, wells, etc., where a supply 
was (c) guaranteed. Water derived from the capture of flash 
floods is not subject to Islamic law as this constitutes an 
uncertain source, and is therefore free for those able to collect 
and use it. However, this traditional allocation per unit of land 
has been bypassed, partly by the development of new supplies, 
but also by the (d) decrease in cultivation of a crop of 
substantial economic importance. This crop is harvested 
throughout the year and thus requires more than its fair share 
of water. The economic status of the crop (e) ensures that water 
rights can be bought or bribed away from subsistence crops.
* irrigation: 관개(灌漑)  ** bribe: 매수하다
*** subsistence crop: 생계용 작물
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Water Rights No Longer Tied to Land
② Strategies for Trading Water Rights
③ Water Storage Methods: Mountain vs. Desert
④ Water Supplies Not Stable in Mountain Regions
⑤ Unending Debates: Which Crop We Should Grow
42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 
것은? [3점]
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e) 
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
“Congratulations!” That was the first word that Steven saw 
when he opened the envelope that his dad handed to him. He 
knew that he would win the essay contest. Overly excited, he 
shouted, “Hooray!” At that moment, two tickets to Ace 
Amusement Park, the prize, slipped out of the envelope. He 
picked them up and read the letter thoroughly while sitting on 
the stairs in front of his house. “Wait a minute! That’s not my 
name!” (a) he said, puzzled. The letter was addressed to his 
classmate Stephanie, who had also participated in the contest.
(B)
Once Steven had heard his dad’s words, tears started to fill 
up in his eyes. “I was foolish,” Steven said regretfully. He 
took the letter and the prize to school and handed them to 
Stephanie. He congratulated her wholeheartedly and she was 
thrilled. On the way home after school, his steps were light 
and full of joy. That night, his dad was very pleased to hear 
what he had done at school. “(b) I am so proud of you, 
Steven,” he said. Then, without a word, he handed Steven 
two Ace Amusement Park tickets and winked.
(C)
“If I don’t tell Stephanie, perhaps she will never know,” 
Steven thought for a moment. He remembered that the winner 
would only be notified by mail. As long as he kept quiet, 
nobody would know. So he decided to sleep on it. The next 
morning, he felt miserable and his dad recognized it right 
away. “What’s wrong, (c) Son?” asked his dad. Steven was 
hesitant at first but soon disclosed his secret. After listening 
attentively to the end, his dad advised him to do the right thing.
(D)
Reading on, Steven realized the letter had been delivered 
mistakenly. “Unfortunately,” it should have gone to Stephanie, 
who was the real winner. (d) He looked at the tickets and then 
the letter. He had really wanted those tickets. He had planned 
to go there with his younger sister. Steven was his sister’s 
hero, and he had bragged to her that he would win the contest. 
However, if she found out that her hero hadn’t won, she would 
be terribly disappointed, and (e) he would feel ashamed.
* brag: 허풍 떨다
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)
② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
것은?
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Steven은 집 앞 계단에 앉아 편지를 자세히 읽었다.
② 방과 후에 집으로 돌아오는 Steven의 발걸음은 무거웠다.
③ 아버지는 Steven에게 옳은 일을 하라고 조언했다.
④ 에세이 대회에서 우승한 사람은 Stephanie였다.
⑤ Steven은 여동생과 놀이공원에 갈 계획이었다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
