
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Ms. Larson,
I am writing to you with new information about your 
current membership. Last year, you signed up for our museum 
membership that provides special discounts. As stated in the 
last newsletter, this year we are happy to be celebrating our 
50th anniversary. So we would like to offer you further 
benefits. These include free admission for up to ten people 
and 20% off museum merchandise on your next visit. You 
will also be invited to all new exhibition openings this year 
at discounted prices. We hope you enjoy these offers. For 
any questions, please feel free to contact us.
Best regards,
Stella Harrison
① 박물관 개관 50주년 기념행사 취소를 공지하려고
② 작년에 가입한 박물관 멤버십의 갱신을 요청하려고
③ 박물관 멤버십 회원을 위한 추가 혜택을 알려 주려고
④ 박물관 기념품점에서 새로 판매할 상품을 홍보하려고
⑤ 박물관 전시 프로그램에서 변경된 내용을 안내하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Natalie의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
As Natalie was logging in to her first online counseling 
session, she wondered, “How can I open my heart to the 
counselor through a computer screen?” Since the counseling 
center was a long drive away, she knew that this would save 
her a lot of time. Natalie just wasn’t sure if it would be as 
helpful as meeting her counselor in person. Once the session 
began, however, her concerns went away. She actually started 
thinking that it was much more convenient than expected. She 
felt as if the counselor were in the room with her. As the 
session closed, she told him with a smile, “I’ll definitely see 
you online again!”
① doubtful
→ satisfied
② regretful → confused
③ confident → ashamed
④ bored
→ excited
⑤ thrilled
→ disappointed
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
New ideas, such as those inspired by scientific developments, 
are often aired and critiqued in our popular culture as part of a 
healthy process of public debate, and scientists sometimes 
deserve the criticism they get. But the popularization of science 
would be greatly enhanced by improving the widespread 
images of the scientist. Part of the problem may be that the 
majority of the people who are most likely to write novels, 
plays, and film scripts were educated in the humanities, not in 
the sciences. Furthermore, the few scientists-turned-writers 
have used their scientific training as the source material for 
thrillers that further damage the image of science and scientists. 
We need more screenplays and novels that present scientists in 
a positive light. In our contemporary world, television and film 
are particularly influential media, and it is likely that the 
introduction of more scientist-heroes would help to make 
science more attractive.
① 과학의 대중화를 위해 여러 매체에서 과학자를 긍정적으로 묘사해야 한다.
② 작가로 전업한 과학자는 전공 지식을 작품에 사실적으로 반영해야 한다.
③ 공상 과학 작가로 성공하려면 과학과 인문학을 깊이 이해해야 한다.
④ 과학의 저변 확대를 위해 영화 주인공으로 과학자가 등장해야 한다.
⑤ 과학 정책 논의에 과학자뿐만 아니라 인문학자도 참여해야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
21. 밑줄 친 an empty inbox가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 
적절한 것은? [3점]
The single most important change you can make in your 
working habits is to switch to creative work first, reactive work 
second. This means blocking off a large chunk of time every 
day for creative work on your own priorities, with the phone 
and e-mail off. I used to be a frustrated writer. Making this 
switch turned me into a productive writer. Yet there wasn’t a 
single day when I sat down to write an article, blog post, or 
book chapter without a string of people waiting for me to get 
back to them. It wasn’t easy, and it still isn’t, particularly when I 
get phone messages beginning “I sent you an e-mail two hours 
ago...!” By definition, this approach goes against the grain of 
others’ expectations and the pressures they put on you. It takes 
willpower to switch off the world, even for an hour. It feels 
uncomfortable, and sometimes people get upset. But it’s better 
to disappoint a few people over small things, than to abandon 
your dreams for an empty inbox. Otherwise, you’re sacrificing 
your potential for the illusion of professionalism.
① following an innovative course of action
② attempting to satisfy other people’s demands
③ completing challenging work without mistakes
④ removing social ties to maintain a mental balance
⑤ securing enough opportunities for social networking
22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Contractors that will construct a project may place more 
weight on the planning process. Proper planning forces detailed 
thinking about the project. It allows the project manager (or 
team) to “build the project in his or her head.” The project 
manager (or team) can consider different methodologies 
thereby deciding what works best or what does not work at all. 
This detailed thinking may be the only way to discover 
restrictions or risks that were not addressed in the estimating 
process. It would be far better to discover in the planning phase 
that a particular technology or material will not work than in 
the execution process. The goal of the planning process for the 
contractor is to produce a workable scheme that uses the 
resources efficiently within the allowable time and given 
budget. A well-developed plan does not guarantee that the 
executing process will proceed flawlessly or that the project 
will even succeed in meeting its objectives. It does, however, 
greatly improve its chances.
* execute: 실행하다
① 계획 수립 절차를 간소화하면 일의 진행 속도가 빨라진다.
② 안정적인 예산 확보는 일의 원활한 진행을 위해 필수적이다.
③ 사업 계획은 급변하는 상황에 따라 유연하게 변경될 수 있다.
④ 면밀한 계획 수립은 일의 효율성을 증대시키고 성공 가능성을 높인다.
⑤ 대규모 사업에서는 지속적인 성장을 목표로 하는 세부 계획이 중요하다.
23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Children can move effortlessly between play and absorption 
in a story, as if both are forms of the same activity. The taking of 
roles in a narratively structured game of pirates is not very 
different than the taking of roles in identifying with characters 
as one watches a movie. It might be thought that, as they grow 
towards adolescence, people give up childhood play, but this is 
not so. Instead, the bases and interests of this activity change 
and develop to playing and watching sports, to the fiction of 
plays, novels, and movies, and nowadays to video games. In 
fiction, one can enter possible worlds. When we experience 
emotions in such worlds, this is not a sign that we are being 
incoherent or regressed. It derives from trying out metaphorical 
transformations of our selves in new ways, in new worlds, in 
ways that can be moving and important to us. 
* pirate: 해적  ** incoherent: 일관되지 않은
① relationship between play types and emotional stability
② reasons for identifying with imaginary characters in childhood
③ ways of helping adolescents develop good reading habits
④ continued engagement in altered forms of play after childhood
⑤ effects of narrative structures on readers’ imaginations
24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Although cognitive and neuropsychological approaches 
emphasize the losses with age that might impair social 
perception, motivational theories indicate that there may be 
some gains or qualitative changes. Charles and Carstensen 
review a considerable body of evidence indicating that, as 
people get older, they tend to prioritize close social relationships, 
focus more on achieving emotional well-being, and attend 
more to positive emotional information while ignoring negative 
information. These changing motivational goals in old age 
have implications for attention to and processing of social cues 
from the environment. Of particular importance in considering 
emotional changes in old age is the presence of a positivity 
bias: that is, a tendency to notice, attend to, and remember 
more positive compared to negative information. The role of 
life experience in social skills also indicates that older adults 
might show gains in some aspects of social perception.
* cognitive: 인식의  ** impair: 해치다
① Social Perception in Old Age: It’s Not All Bad News!
② Blocking Out the Negative Sharpens Social Skills
③ Lessons on Life-long Goals from Senior Achievers
④ Getting Old: A Road to Maturity and Objectivity
⑤ Positive Mind and Behavior: Tips for Reversing Aging
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph, which was based on a survey conducted in 
2019, shows the percentages of U.S. adults by age group who 
said they had read (or listened to) a book in one or more of the 
formats ―print books, e-books, and audiobooks ― in the 
previous 12 months. ① The percentage of people in the 18-29 
group who said they had read a print book was 74%, which 
was the highest among the four groups. ② The percentage of 
people who said they had read a print book in the 50-64 group 
was higher than that in the 65 and up group. ③ While 34% of 
people in the 18-29 group said they had read an e-book, the 
percentage of people who said so was below 20% in the 65 and 
up group. ④ In all age groups, the percentage of people who 
said they had read an e-book was higher than that of people 
who said they had listened to an audiobook. ⑤ Among the 
four age groups, the 30-49 group had the highest percentage of 
people who said they had listened to an audiobook.
26. Emil Zátopek에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Emil Zátopek, a former Czech athlete, is considered one of 
the greatest long-distance runners ever. He was also famous 
for his distinctive running style. While working in a shoe 
factory, he participated in a 1,500-meter race and won second 
place. After that event, he took a more serious interest in 
running and devoted himself to it. At the 1952 Olympic Games 
in Helsinki, he won three gold medals in the 5,000-meter and 
10,000-meter races and in the marathon, breaking Olympic 
records in each. He was married to Dana Zátopková, who was 
an Olympic gold medalist, too. Zátopek was also noted for his 
friendly personality. In 1966, Zátopek invited Ron Clarke, a 
great Australian runner who had never won an Olympic gold 
medal, to an athletic meeting in Prague. After the meeting, he 
gave Clarke one of his gold medals as a gift.
① 독특한 달리기 스타일로 유명했다.
② 신발 공장에서 일한 적이 있다.
③ 1952년 Helsinki 올림픽에서 올림픽 기록을 깨지 못했다.
④ 올림픽 금메달리스트인 Dana Zátopková와 결혼했다.
⑤ 자신의 금메달 중 하나를 Ron Clarke에게 주었다.
27. Wing Cheese Factory Tour에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
일치하지 않는 것은?
① 참가비에는 치즈 만들기 비용이 포함된다.
② 참가 신청은 6월 30일까지 해야 한다.
③ 공장의 역사에 대한 비디오를 보는 일정이 있다.
④ 참가자는 치즈 모양의 열쇠고리를 15달러에 살 수 있다.
⑤ 공장 안에서 사진 촬영이 허용된다.
28. Treehouse Drive-in Movie Night에 관한 다음 안내문의 
내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 2021년에 두 번째로 열리는 행사이다.
② 티켓 판매 수입금 전액은 어린이 도서관에 기부될 것이다.
③ 첫 번째 상영 시작 시간은 오후 10시이다.
④ 티켓 가격은 자동차 한 대당 50달러이다.
⑤ 아이스크림과 핫도그가 현장에서 판매된다.
Attention, all cheese lovers! Come and experience our 
historic cheese-making process at the Wing Cheese Factory. 
Look around, taste, and make! 
Participation 
∙Adults: $30, Children: $10 (Ages 3 and under: Free)
∙The fee includes cheese tasting and making.
∙Sign up for the tour at www.cheesewcf.com by June 30.
Tour Schedule
∙10:00 a.m.: Watch a video about the factory’s history
∙10:30 a.m.: Factory tour and cheese tasting
∙11:30 a.m.: Cheese making
Note 
∙Participants can buy a cheese-shaped key chain for $15.
∙No photography is allowed inside the factory.
∙We are closed on Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.
Treehouse Drive-in Movie Night
Looking for a fun night out with the family? Come with 
your loved ones and enjoy our first drive-in movie night of 
2021! All money from ticket sales will be donated to the 
local children’s hospital.
Featured Film: Dream Story
Date: June 13, 2021
Place: Treehouse Parking Lot
Showtimes
∙First Screening: 7:30 p.m. 
∙Second Screening: 10:00 p.m.
Tickets: $30 per car
Additional Information 
∙50 parking spots are available (The gate opens at 6 p.m.).
∙Ice cream and hot dogs are sold on site.
∙Make your reservation online at www.tdimn.com.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Most historians of science point to the need for a reliable 
calendar to regulate agricultural activity as the motivation for 
learning about what we now call astronomy, the study of stars 
and planets. Early astronomy provided information about when 
to plant crops and gave humans ① their first formal method of 
recording the passage of time. Stonehenge, the 4,000-year-old 
ring of stones in southern Britain, ② is perhaps the best-known 
monument to the discovery of regularity and predictability in 
the world we inhabit. The great markers of Stonehenge point to 
the spots on the horizon ③ where the sun rises at the solstices 
and equinoxes ― the dates we still use to mark the beginnings 
of the seasons. The stones may even have ④ been used to 
predict eclipses. The existence of Stonehenge, built by people 
without writing, bears silent testimony both to the regularity of 
nature and to the ability of the human mind to see behind 
immediate appearances and ⑤ discovers deeper meanings in 
events.
* monument: 기념비  ** eclipse: (해･달의) 식(蝕) 
*** testimony: 증언
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
않은 것은?
Sport can trigger an emotional response in its consumers of 
the kind rarely brought forth by other products. Imagine bank 
customers buying memorabilia to show loyalty to their bank, or 
consumers ① identifying so strongly with their car insurance 
company that they get a tattoo with its logo. We know that some 
sport followers are so ② passionate about players, teams and 
the sport itself that their interest borders on obsession. This 
addiction provides the emotional glue that binds fans to teams, 
and maintains loyalty even in the face of on-field ③ failure. 
While most managers can only dream of having customers that 
are as passionate about their products as sport fans, the emotion 
triggered by sport can also have a negative impact. Sport’s 
emotional intensity can mean that organisations have strong 
attachments to the past through nostalgia and club tradition. As 
a result, they may ④ increase efficiency, productivity and the 
need to respond quickly to changing market conditions. For 
example, a proposal to change club colours in order to project a 
more attractive image may be ⑤ defeated because it breaks a 
link with tradition.
* memorabilia: 기념품  ** obsession: 집착
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. The growth of academic disciplines and sub-disciplines, 
such as art history or palaeontology, and of particular figures 
such as the art critic, helped produce principles and practices 
for selecting and organizing what was worthy of keeping, 
though it remained a struggle. Moreover, as museums and 
universities drew further apart toward the end of the nineteenth 
century, and as the idea of objects as a highly valued route to 
knowing the world went into decline, collecting began to lose 
its status as a worthy intellectual pursuit, especially in the 
sciences. The really interesting and important aspects of 
science were increasingly those invisible to the naked eye, 
and the classification of things collected no longer promised 
to produce cutting-edge knowledge. The term “butterfly 
collecting” could come to be used with the adjective “mere” to 
indicate a pursuit of
academic status.
* palaeontology: 고생물학  ** adjective: 형용사
① competitive
② novel
③ secondary
④ reliable
⑤ unconditional
32. Some of the most insightful work on information seeking 
emphasizes “strategic self-ignorance,” understood as “the use of 
ignorance as an excuse to engage excessively in pleasurable 
activities that may be harmful to one’s future self.” The idea here 
is that if people are present-biased, they might avoid information 
that would
― perhaps 
because it would produce guilt or shame, perhaps because it 
would suggest an aggregate trade-off that would counsel against 
engaging in such activities. St. Augustine famously said, “God 
give me chastity ― tomorrow.” Present-biased agents think: 
“Please let me know the risks ― tomorrow.” Whenever people 
are thinking about engaging in an activity with short-term 
benefits but long-term costs, they might prefer to delay receipt 
of important information. The same point might hold about 
information that could make people sad or mad: “Please tell me 
what I need to know ― tomorrow.”
* aggregate: 합계의  ** chastity: 정결
① highlight the value of preferred activities
② make current activities less attractive
③ cut their attachment to past activities
④ enable them to enjoy more activities
⑤ potentially become known to others
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. Concepts of nature are always cultural statements. This 
may not strike Europeans as much of an insight, for Europe’s 
landscape is so much of a blend. But in the new worlds ―
‘new’ at least to Europeans ― the distinction appeared much 
clearer not only to European settlers and visitors but also to 
their descendants. For that reason, they had the fond conceit 
of primeval nature uncontrolled by human associations 
which could later find expression in an admiration for 
wilderness. Ecological relationships certainly have their own 
logic and in this sense ‘nature’ can be seen to have a 
self-regulating but not necessarily stable dynamic independent 
of human intervention. But the context for ecological interactions
. We may not 
determine how or what a lion eats but we certainly can 
regulate where the lion feeds. [3점]
* conceit: 생각  ** primeval: 원시(시대)의
*** ecological: 생태학의
① has supported new environment-friendly policies
② has increasingly been set by humanity
③ inspires creative cultural practices
④ changes too frequently to be regulated
⑤ has been affected by various natural conditions
34. Emma Brindley has investigated the responses of European 
robins to the songs of neighbors and strangers. Despite the 
large and complex song repertoire of European robins, they 
were able to discriminate between the songs of neighbors and 
strangers. When they heard a tape recording of a stranger, they 
began to sing sooner, sang more songs, and overlapped their 
songs with the playback more often than they did on hearing a 
neighbor’s song. As Brindley suggests, the overlapping of 
song may be an aggressive response. However, this difference 
in responding to neighbor versus stranger occurred only when 
the neighbor’s song was played by a loudspeaker placed at 
the boundary between that neighbor’s territory and the 
territory of the bird being tested. If the same neighbor’s song 
was played at another boundary, one separating the territory of 
the test subject from another neighbor, it was treated as the 
call of a stranger. Not only does this result demonstrate that 
, but it also 
shows that the choice of songs used in playback experiments 
is highly important. [3점]
* robin: 울새  ** territory: 영역
① variety and complexity characterize the robins’ songs
② song volume affects the robins’ aggressive behavior
③ the robins’ poor territorial sense is a key to survival
④ the robins associate locality with familiar songs
⑤ the robins are less responsive to recorded songs 
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Kinship ties continue to be important today. In modern 
societies such as the United States people frequently have family 
get-togethers, they telephone their relatives regularly, and they 
provide their kin with a wide variety of services. ① Eugene 
Litwak has referred to this pattern of behaviour as the ‘modified 
extended family’. ② It is an extended family structure because 
multigenerational ties are maintained, but it is modified 
because it does not usually rest on co-residence between the 
generations and most extended families do not act as corporate 
groups. ③ Although modified extended family members often 
live close by, the modified extended family does not require 
geographical proximity and ties are maintained even when 
kin are separated by considerable distances. ④ The oldest 
member of the family makes the decisions on important 
issues, no matter how far away family members live from each 
other. ⑤ In contrast to the traditional extended family where 
kin always live in close proximity, the members of modified 
extended families may freely move away from kin to seek 
opportunities for occupational advancement. 
* kin: 친족  ** proximity: 근접
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
Spatial reference points are larger than themselves. This 
isn’t really a paradox: landmarks are themselves, but they 
also define neighborhoods around themselves. 
(A) In a paradigm that has been repeated on many campuses, 
researchers first collect a list of campus landmarks from 
students. Then they ask another group of students to 
estimate the distances between pairs of locations, some to 
landmarks, some to ordinary buildings on campus.
(B) This asymmetry of distance estimates violates the most 
elementary principles of Euclidean distance, that the 
distance from A to B must be the same as the distance 
from B to A. Judgments of distance, then, are not 
necessarily coherent.
(C) The remarkable finding is that distances from an ordinary 
location to a landmark are judged shorter than distances 
from a landmark to an ordinary location. So, people would 
judge the distance from Pierre’s house to the Eiffel Tower 
to be shorter than the distance from the Eiffel Tower to 
Pierre’s house. Like black holes, landmarks seem to pull 
ordinary locations toward themselves, but ordinary places 
do not.
* asymmetry: 비대칭 
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
A firm is deciding whether to invest in shipbuilding. If it 
can produce at sufficiently large scale, it knows the venture 
will be profitable. 
(A) There is a “good” outcome, in which both types of 
investments are made, and both the shipyard and the 
steelmakers end up profitable and happy. Equilibrium is 
reached. Then there is a “bad” outcome, in which neither 
type of investment is made. This second outcome also is 
an equilibrium because the decisions not to invest 
reinforce each other. 
(B) Assume that shipyards are the only potential customers of 
steel. Steel producers figure they’ll make money if there’s 
a shipyard to buy their steel, but not otherwise. Now we 
have two possible outcomes ― what economists call 
“multiple equilibria.” 
(C) But one key input is low-cost steel, and it must be produced 
nearby. The company’s decision boils down to this: if there 
is a steel factory close by, invest in shipbuilding; otherwise, 
don’t invest. Now consider the thinking of potential steel 
investors in the region. [3점]
* equilibrium: 균형
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
A problem, however, is that supervisors often work in 
locations apart from their employees and therefore are not 
able to observe their subordinates’ performance.
In most organizations, the employee’s immediate supervisor 
evaluates the employee’s performance. ( ① ) This is because 
the supervisor is responsible for the employee’s performance, 
providing supervision, handing out assignments, and developing 
the employee. ( ② ) Should supervisors rate employees on 
performance dimensions they cannot observe? ( ③ ) To 
eliminate this dilemma, more and more organizations are 
implementing assessments referred to as 360-degree evaluations.
( ④ ) Employees are rated not only by their supervisors but 
by coworkers, clients or citizens, professionals in other 
agencies with whom they work, and subordinates. ( ⑤ ) The 
reason for this approach is that often coworkers and clients or 
citizens have a greater opportunity to observe an employee’s 
performance and are in a better position to evaluate many 
performance dimensions. 
* subordinate: 부하 직원
39.
This is particularly true since one aspect of sleep is decreased 
responsiveness to the environment.
The role that sleep plays in evolution is still under study.
( ① ) One possibility is that it is an advantageous adaptive 
state of decreased metabolism for an animal when there are no 
more pressing activities. ( ② ) This seems true for deeper 
states of inactivity such as hibernation during the winter when 
there are few food supplies, and a high metabolic cost to 
maintaining adequate temperature. ( ③ ) It may be true in 
daily situations as well, for instance for a prey species to avoid 
predators after dark. ( ④ ) On the other hand, the apparent 
universality of sleep, and the observation that mammals such 
as cetaceans have developed such highly complex mechanisms 
to preserve sleep on at least one side of the brain at a time, 
suggests that sleep additionally provides some vital service(s) 
for the organism. ( ⑤ ) If sleep is universal even when this 
potential price must be paid, the implication may be that it has 
important functions that cannot be obtained just by quiet, 
wakeful resting. [3점]
* metabolism: 신진대사  ** mammal: 포유동물
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), 
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The idea that planting trees could have a social or 
political significance appears to have been invented by 
the English, though it has since spread widely. According 
to Keith Thomas’s history Man and the Natural World, 
seventeenth- and eighteenth-century aristocrats began 
planting hardwood trees, usually in lines, to declare the 
extent of their property and the permanence of their claim 
to it. “What can be more pleasant,” the editor of a 
magazine for gentlemen asked his readers, “than to have 
the bounds and limits of your own property preserved and 
continued from age to age by the testimony of such living 
and growing witnesses?” Planting trees had the additional 
advantage of being regarded as a patriotic act, for the 
Crown had declared a severe shortage of the hardwood on 
which the Royal Navy depended.
* aristocrat: 귀족  ** patriotic: 애국적인
󰀻
For English aristocrats, planting trees served as statements 
to mark the 
(A)
 ownership of their land, and it 
was also considered to be a(n) 
(B)
 of their loyalty 
to the nation.
(A)
(B)
(A)
(B)
① unstable ……confirmation
② unstable ……exaggeration
③ lasting
……exhibition
④ lasting
……manipulation
⑤ official ……justification
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
The right to privacy may extend only to the point where it 
does not restrict someone else’s right to freedom of 
expression or right to information. The scope of the right to 
privacy is (a) similarly restricted by the general interest in 
preventing crime or in promoting public health. However, 
when we move away from the property-based notion of a 
right (where the right to privacy would protect, for example, 
images and personality), to modern notions of private and 
family life, we find it (b) easier to establish the limits of the 
right. This is, of course, the strength of the notion of privacy, 
in that it can adapt to meet changing expectations and 
technological advances. 
In sum, what is privacy today? The concept includes a 
claim that we should be unobserved, and that certain 
information and images about us should not be (c) circulated 
without our permission. Why did these privacy claims arise? 
They arose because powerful people took offence at such 
observation. Furthermore, privacy incorporated the need to 
protect the family, home, and correspondence from 
arbitrary (d) interference and, in addition, there has been a 
determination to protect honour and reputation. How is 
privacy protected? Historically, privacy was protected by 
restricting circulation of the damaging material. But if the 
concept of privacy first became interesting legally as a 
response to reproductions of images through photography and 
newspapers, more recent technological advances, such as data 
storage, digital images, and the Internet, (e) pose new threats 
to privacy. The right to privacy is now being reinterpreted to 
meet those challenges.
* arbitrary: 임의의
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Side Effects of Privacy Protection Technologies
② The Legal Domain of Privacy Claims and Conflicts
③ The Right to Privacy: Evolving Concepts and Practices
④ Who Really Benefits from Looser Privacy Regulations?
⑤ Less Is More: Reduce State Intervention in Privacy!
42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 
것은? [3점]
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e) 
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Fighting against the force of the water was a thrilling 
challenge. Sophia tried to keep herself planted firmly in the 
boat, paying attention to the waves crashing against the rocks. 
As the water got rougher, she was forced to paddle harder to 
keep the waves from tossing her into the water. Her friends Mia 
and Rebecca were paddling eagerly behind her to balance the 
boat. They were soaked from all of the spray. Mia shouted to 
Sophia, “Are you OK? Aren’t (a) you scared?”
* paddle: 노를 젓다
(B)
“You’ve got a good point. It’s a real advantage to graduate 
from college with the mindset of a daring adventurer,” Mia 
said. Rebecca quickly added, “That’s why I went to 
Mongolia before I started my first job out of college. 
Teaching English there for two months was a big challenge 
for me. But (b) I learned a lot from the experience. It really 
gave me the courage to try anything in life.” Listening to her 
friends, Sophia looked at (c) her own reflection in the water 
and saw a confident young woman smiling back at her.
(C)
“I’m great!” Sophia shouted back excitedly. Even though 
the boat was getting thrown around, the girls managed to 
avoid hitting any rocks. Suddenly, almost as quickly as the 
water had got rougher, the river seemed to calm down, and 
they all felt relaxed. With a sigh of relief, Sophia looked 
around. “Wow! What a wonderful view!” (d) she shouted. 
The scenery around them was breathtaking. Everyone was 
speechless. As they enjoyed the emerald green Rocky 
Mountains, Mia said, “No wonder rafting is the best thing to 
do in Colorado!”
(D)
Agreeing with her friend, Rebecca gave a thumbs-up. 
“Sophia, your choice was excellent!” she said with a delighted 
smile. “I thought you were afraid of water, though, Sophia,” 
Mia said. Sophia explained, “Well, I was before I started 
rafting. But I graduate from college in a few months. And, 
before I do, I wanted to do something really adventurous to 
test my bravery. I thought that if I did something completely 
crazy, it might give (e) me more confidence when I’m 
interviewing for jobs.” Now they could see why she had 
suggested going rafting.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)
② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
것은?
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Mia와 Rebecca는 보트의 균형을 유지하려고 애썼다.
② Rebecca는 몽골에서 영어를 가르친 경험이 있다.
③ Sophia와 친구들이 함께 탄 보트는 바위에 부딪치지 않았다.
④ Sophia는 래프팅을 하기 전에는 물을 두려워했다.
⑤ Sophia는 용기를 시험할 모험을 대학 졸업 후에 하길 원했다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
