
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Ms. Molly Oliver,
This is Mark Foster, one of the volunteers for the 
Auditory Frog and Toad Survey. Unfortunately, I was not 
able to participate in the orientation last weekend, so I 
could not receive training in distinguishing the sounds of 
frogs and toads. I heard from another participant that a CD 
was used in the training session. I was wondering if you 
could send me one. Since we have ten more days before 
the survey begins, I’ll have enough time to receive and use 
the CD to train myself. You can send it to me at the 
address in my application. I am looking forward to hearing 
from you soon. Thank you.
Sincerely,
Mark Foster
① 자원 봉사 참가를 취소하려고
② CD를 보내 줄 수 있는지 문의하려고
③ 신청서에 기입한 주소를 수정하려고
④ 양서류 생태 조사 일정을 확인하려고
⑤ 오리엔테이션에 참석할 수 없음을 알리려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘she’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
When she heard the dogs barking fiercely on the floor just 
above her, she trembled uncontrollably for fear of being 
caught. Drops of cold sweat rolled down her back. Before 
slipping into the hold of the boat, she had scattered powder, 
which Swedish scientists had developed, unnoticeably on the 
floor above in order to distract the dogs. But she knew that 
these dogs were so well trained that they could smell her, even 
though a load of fish had been dumped over her hiding place. 
She held her hands together tightly and tried not to make any 
noise. She was not sure how long she could stay like that. To 
her relief, it wasn’t long before a whistle called the dogs out, 
leaving her unfound. She relaxed her hands and exhaled a 
deep breath. She felt safe now.
① terrified
→ relieved
② delighted → frustrated
③ scared
→ annoyed
④ bored
→ excited
⑤ disappointed → exhausted
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Have you ever met someone while you were experiencing 
significant emotional, psychological, or physical stress? 
Perhaps you stayed up all night studying for a final, or maybe 
you learned that a grandparent recently died. You likely 
exhibited behaviors that are not consistent with how you 
usually act. Meeting someone when you are extremely 
stressed can create an inaccurate impression of you. For this 
reason, recognize that our first impressions of others also may 
be perceptual errors. To help avoid committing these errors, 
engage in perception checking, which means that we consider 
a series of questions to confirm or challenge our perceptions 
of others and their behaviors. For example, see if you can 
provide two possible interpretations for the verbal and 
nonverbal behavior observed and seek clarification of it in 
order to determine the accuracy of your evaluation.
① 상대방에 대한 자신의 인식에 오류가 없는지 점검하라.
② 정신적 스트레스가 심할 때는 타인과의 만남을 피하라.
③ 처음 만나는 사람에게 좋은 인상을 주도록 노력하라.
④ 상대방의 심리를 파악하고 자신의 감정을 표현하라.
⑤ 언어적 행동과 비언어적 행동을 일치시켜라.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
When we see a happy face (or an angry one), it subtly 
generates the corresponding emotion in us. To the degree we 
take on the pace, posture, and facial expression of another 
person, we start to inhabit their emotional space; as our body 
mimics the other’s, we begin to experience emotional 
matching. Our nervous system is automatically set to engage 
in this emotional empathy. But how well we use this capacity 
is largely a learned ability. Animals－and people－who have 
been raised in extreme social isolation are poor at reading 
emotional cues in those around them not because they lack the 
basic circuitry for empathy but because, lacking emotional 
tutors, they have never learned to pay attention to these 
messages and so haven’t practiced this skill.
① 긍정적인 감정은 더 많은 공감을 불러일으킨다.
② 사람과 동물은 모방하는 능력에서 차이를 보인다.
③ 타인과 공감하는 능력을 잘 사용하려면 학습이 필요하다.
④ 얼굴 표정은 상대방의 감정을 파악하는 중요한 단서이다.
⑤ 인간이 타인과 공감하는 정도는 신경계에 의해 결정된다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
When we hear a story, we look for beliefs that are being 
commented upon. Any story has many possible beliefs 
inherent in it. But how does someone listening to a story find 
those beliefs? We find them by looking through the beliefs we 
already have. We are not as concerned with what we are 
hearing as we are with finding what we already know that is 
relevant. Picture it in this way. As understanders, we have a 
list of beliefs, indexed by subject area. When a new story 
appears, we attempt to find a belief of ours that relates to it. 
When we do, we find a story attached to that belief and 
compare the story in our memory to the one we are 
processing. Our understanding of the new story becomes, at 
that point, a function of the old story. Once we find a belief 
and connected story, we need no further processing; that is, 
the search for other beliefs stops.
① the use of a new story in understanding an old story
② the limits of our memory capacity in recalling stories
③ the influence of new stories on challenging our beliefs
④ the most efficient strategy to improve storytelling skills
⑤ the role of our existing beliefs in comprehending a new story
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Savannas pose a bit of a problem for ecologists. There is an 
axiom in ecology that ‘complete competitors cannot coexist’: 
in other words, where two populations of organisms use 
exactly the same resources, one would be expected to do so 
slightly more efficiently than the other and therefore come to 
dominate in the long term. In temperate parts of the world, 
either trees dominate (in forests) or grasses dominate (in 
grasslands). Yet, in savannas grasses and trees coexist. The 
classic explanation proposes that trees have deep roots while 
grasses have shallow roots. The two plant types are therefore 
able to coexist because they are not in fact competitors: the 
trees increase in wetter climates and on sandier soils because 
more water is able to penetrate to the deep roots. Trees do 
indeed have a few small roots which penetrate to great depth, 
but most of their roots are in the top half-metre of the soil, just 
where the grass roots are.
* axiom: 원리, 공리
① A War at Hand Between Plants in Savannas
② A Rivalry for Wetter Soils among Savanna Trees
③ Are Savannas a Hidden Treasure of Bio-Diversity?
④ Cyclic Dominance of Trees over Grasses in Savannas
⑤ Strange Companions: Savanna Plants Confuse Ecologists
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The graph above shows the Western Hemisphere oil 
production per day in 2010 and proven oil reserves as of 2011 
for selected countries. ① The United States recorded 9.65 
million barrels of daily oil production in 2010, the greatest 
daily oil production among the countries shown on the graph. 
② Canada had the second largest daily oil production followed 
by Mexico and Brazil, with Venezuela recording the lowest 
among the five countries in 2010. ③ As for proven oil reserves, 
however, Venezuela recorded the largest amount among these 
countries in 2011, possessing 211.2 billion barrels, followed by 
Canada with 175.2 billion barrels. ④ In 2011, the sum of the 
proven oil reserves of the United States, Mexico, and Brazil 
was greater than those of Venezuela. ⑤ Brazil had larger 
proven oil reserves than Mexico in 2011, but the daily oil 
production of Brazil was lower than that of Mexico in 2010.
* proven oil reserves: 확인된 석유 매장량
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. Sequoyah에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Sequoyah, a Cherokee Indian, was born in about 1770 in 
Taskigi, now in Tennessee. Raised by his Cherokee mother, 
the young Sequoyah never learned to read or write English. 
While interacting with English speakers, he realized the 
necessity of a writing system for the Cherokee people. In 
about 1809, Sequoyah began developing a system of writing, 
adapting letters from English, Greek, and Hebrew. By 1821, 
he had created a system of 86 symbols, representing all the 
syllables of the Cherokee language. The Cherokee people 
began to use the system in their schools and publish books 
and newspapers in their language. In 1824, the General 
Council of the Eastern Cherokees awarded Sequoyah a medal 
in honor of his accomplishment. Sequoyah moved to 
Oklahoma some years later and died in what is now Texas in 
1843. And later, people remembered him by naming a certain 
tree species “Sequoia.”
* syllable: 음절
① 1770년경 Taskigi에서 태어났다.
② 어린 시절에 영어를 읽고 쓰는 법을 배웠다.
③ Cherokee 사람들을 위한 문자 체계의 필요성을 깨달았다.
④ 업적을 인정받아 1824년에 메달을 받았다.
⑤ 1843년에 지금의 Texas에서 세상을 떠났다.
26. Kingston Badminton Program에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
일치하지 않는 것은?
① 일주일에 3일씩 4주 동안 운영된다.
② 오후 6시에는 15세 이상을 대상으로 진행된다.
③ 개인용 사물함을 이용하려면 추가 비용이 든다.
④ 등록 마감일은 6월 10일이다.
⑤ 배드민턴 라켓과 셔틀콕을 제공한다.
27. 16th Springvale Book Festival에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
일치하는 것은?
① 6월 4일부터 5일간 개최된다.
② 작가들의 강연이 오전에 예정되어 있다.
③ 행사장에서 구매한 책에 한정하여 작가들이 사인을 해 준다.
④ 웹 사이트에서 행사 정보 앱(app)을 내려 받을 수 있다.
⑤ 일부 프로그램의 경우 입장료를 지불해야 한다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
If an animal is innately programmed for some type of 
behaviour, then there ① are likely to be biological clues. It is 
no accident that fish have bodies which are streamlined and 
② smooth, with fins and a powerful tail. Their bodies are 
structurally adapted for moving fast through the water. 
Similarly, if you found a dead bird or mosquito, you could 
guess by looking at ③ its wings that flying was its normal 
mode of transport. However, we must not be over-optimistic. 
Biological clues are not essential. The extent to which they are 
④ finding varies from animal to animal and from activity to 
activity. For example, it is impossible to guess from their 
bodies that birds make nests, and, sometimes, animals behave 
in a way quite contrary to ⑤ what might be expected from 
their physical form: ghost spiders have tremendously long 
legs, yet they weave webs out of very short threads. To a 
human observer, their legs seem a great hindrance as they spin 
and move about the web.
Kingston Badminton Program
Are you looking for a simple and effective sports 
program? Then check out the Kingston Badminton 
Program and choose one of our courses taught by the 
most experienced badminton coaches.
∙Course sessions will be held three days a week 
(Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays) for 4 weeks 
from June 20 to July 15.
3:00 p.m.－4:00 p.m.: Ages 7－10
4:30 p.m.－5:30 p.m.: Ages 11－14 
6:00 p.m.－7:00 p.m.: Ages 15 and up
∙The tuition fee is $50 per person with a free personal 
locker.
∙The deadline for registration is June 10.
∙Badminton rackets and shuttlecocks are provided.
For further information, call the Kingston Community 
Center at 322－480－5267.
16th Springvale Book Festival
Saturday, June 4, 10 a.m.－5 p.m.
Springvale Public Library 
(4536 Main Street, Springvale, WI)
Mark your calendar for the 16th Springvale Book 
Festival. This is your big chance to meet the nation’s 
BEST authors and discuss their works.
Authors will be speaking at the main hall on the 2nd 
floor from 2 p.m. to 4 p.m.
Note: Authors will be signing books in the lobby, so 
please bring your own personal copies or you can 
purchase books on site.
Get the most out of your big day by downloading the 
festival app at our website (www.spvbf.org). It features 
a complete list of all events & locations, maps, and ways 
to share it all via social media.
All programs will be FREE of charge!
Please visit our website for more information about 
the festival.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 
적절한 것은? [3점]
In 2001, researchers at Wayne State University asked a 
group of college volunteers to exercise for twenty minutes at a 
(A) preset / self-selected  pace on each of three machines: a 
treadmill, a stationary bike, and a stair climber. Measurements 
of heart rate, oxygen consumption, and perceived effort were 
taken throughout all three workouts. The researchers expected 
to find that the subjects unconsciously targeted the same 
relative physiological intensity in each activity. Perhaps they 
would (B) automatically / intentionally  exercise at 65 percent 
of their maximum heart rate regardless of which machine they 
were using. Or maybe they would instinctively settle into 
rhythm at 70 percent of their maximum rate of oxygen 
consumption in all three workouts. But that’s not what 
happened. There was, in fact, no (C) consistency / variation  
in measurements of heart rate and oxygen consumption across 
the three disciplines. Instead, the subjects were found to have 
chosen the same level of perceived effort on the treadmill, the 
bike, and the stair climber.
* treadmill: 러닝머신
** physiological: 생리학적인
(A)
(B)
(C)
① preset
…… intentionally
…… consistency
② preset
…… automatically …… variation
③ self-selected …… intentionally
…… variation
④ self-selected …… intentionally
…… consistency
⑤ self-selected …… automatically …… consistency
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
In the summer of 1972, the actor Anthony Hopkins was 
signed to play a leading role in a film based on George 
Feifer’s novel The Girl from Petrovka. That is why ① he 
traveled to London to buy a copy of the book. Unfortunately, 
none of the main London bookstores had a copy. Then, on his 
way home, waiting for an underground train at Leicester 
Square tube station, he saw a discarded book lying on the seat 
next to ② him. It was a copy of The Girl from Petrovka. As if 
that was not coincidence enough, more was to follow. Later, 
when ③ he had a chance to meet the author, Hopkins told him 
about this strange occurrence. Feifer was interested. He said to 
④ him that in November 1971 he had lent a friend a copy of 
the book—a unique copy in which he had made notes on 
turning the British English into American English for the 
publication of an American version—but his friend had lost 
the copy in London. A quick check of the copy Hopkins had 
found showed that it was the very same copy that ⑤ his friend 
had mislaid.
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Once a hand or gripper has been directed to an object by 
reaching, it can be grasped. Grasping requires that fingers hold 
an object securely. A secure grip is one in which the object 
won’t slip or move, especially when displaced by an external 
force. Your grasp on a hammer, for example, would not be 
secure if knocking against something caused you to drop it. 
One precondition of a firm grasp is that the forces applied by 
the fingers balance each other so as not to disturb the object’s 
position. The characteristics of an object such as its geometric 
configuration and mass distribution may demand that some 
fingers apply greater force than others to maintain 
. 
The grasp and support forces must also match overall object 
mass and fragility. An egg requires a more delicate touch than 
a rock. [3점]
* geometric configuration: 기하학적 형태
** fragility: 부서지기 쉬움
① distance
② efficiency
③ mobility
④ direction
⑤ stability
32. What story could be harsher than that of the Great Auk, the 
large black-and-white seabird that in northern oceans took the 
ecological place of a penguin? Its tale rises and falls like a 
Greek tragedy, with island populations savagely destroyed by 
humans until almost all were gone. Then the very last colony 
found safety on a special island, one protected from the 
destruction of humankind by vicious and unpredictable ocean 
currents. These waters presented no problem to perfectly 
adapted seagoing birds, but they prevented humans from 
making any kind of safe landing. After enjoying a few years 
of comparative safety, disaster of a different kind struck the 
Great Auk. Volcanic activity caused the island refuge to sink 
completely beneath the waves, and surviving individuals were 
forced to find shelter elsewhere. The new island home they 
chose 
 in one 
terrible way. Humans could access it with comparative ease, 
and they did! Within just a few years the last of this 
once-plentiful species was entirely eliminated. [3점]
* savagely: 잔혹하게
① lacked the benefits of the old
② denied other colonies easy access
③ faced unexpected natural disasters
④ caused conflicts among the refugees
⑤ had a similar disadvantage to the last island
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. It is not hard to see that a strong economy, where 
opportunities 
are 
plentiful 
and 
jobs 
go 
begging, 
. Biased employers 
may still dislike hiring members of one group or another, but 
when nobody else is available, discrimination most often 
gives way to the basic need to get the work done. The same 
goes for employees with prejudices about whom they do and 
do not like working alongside. In the American construction 
boom of the late 1990s, for example, even the carpenters’ 
union—long known as a “traditional bastion of white men, a 
world where a coveted union card was handed down from 
father to son”—began openly encouraging women, blacks, 
and Hispanics to join its internship program. At least in the 
workplace, jobs chasing people obviously does more to 
promote a fluid society than people chasing jobs. [3점]
* bastion: 요새
** coveted: 부러움을 사는
① allows employees to earn more income
② helps break down social barriers
③ simplifies the hiring process
④ increases wage discrimination
⑤ improves the productivity of a company
34. One remarkable aspect of aboriginal culture is the concept 
of “totemism,” where the tribal member at birth assumes the 
soul and identity of a part of nature. This view of the earth and 
its riches as an intrinsic part of oneself clearly rules out 
mistreatment of the environment because this would only 
constitute a destruction of self. Totems are more than objects. 
They include spiritual rituals, oral histories, and the 
organization of ceremonial lodges where records of the past 
travel routes of the soul can be exchanged with others and 
converted to mythology. The primary motivation is the 
preservation of tribal myths and a consolidation and sharing of 
every individual’s origins in nature. The aborigines see 
, 
through a hierarchy of totems that connect to their ancestral 
origins, a cosmology that places them at one with the earth, and 
behavior patterns that respect ecological balance. [3점]
* aboriginal: 원주민의
** consolidation: 병합, 강화
① themselves as incompatible with nature and her riches
② their mythology as a primary motive toward individualism
③ their identity as being self-contained from surrounding nature
④ their relationship to the environment as a single harmonious 
continuum
⑤ their communal rituals as a gateway to distancing themselves 
from their origins
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Roles are like a fence. They allow us a certain amount of 
freedom, but for most of us that freedom doesn’t go very far. 
Suppose that a woman decides that she is not going to wear 
dresses—or a man that he will not wear suits and ties—
regardless of what anyone says. ① In most situations, they’ll 
stick to their decision. ② When a formal occasion comes 
along, however, such as a family wedding or a funeral, they 
are likely to cave in to norms that they find overwhelming. 
③ The increasing social pressure discourages us from 
fulfilling the social norms and committing ourselves to shared 
social conventions of behaviour. ④ Almost all of us follow 
the guidelines for what is “appropriate” for our roles. ⑤ Few 
of us are bothered by such restrictions, for our socialization is 
so thorough that we usually want to do what our roles indicate 
is appropriate.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
The ancient Greeks sought to improve memory through 
brain training methods such as memory palaces and the 
method of loci. At the same time, they and the Egyptians 
became experts at externalizing information, inventing the 
modern library, a grand storehouse for externalized 
knowledge.
(A) This need isn’t simply learned; it is a biological imperative—
animals organize their environments instinctively. Most 
mammals are biologically programmed to put their 
digestive waste away from where they eat and sleep.
(B) We don’t know why these simultaneous explosions of 
intellectual activity occurred when they did (perhaps daily 
human experience had hit a certain level of complexity). 
But the human need to organize our lives, our 
environment, even our thoughts, remains strong.
(C) Dogs have been known to collect their toys and put them 
in baskets; ants carry off dead members of the colony to 
burial grounds; certain birds and rodents create barriers 
around their nests in order to more easily detect invaders.
* method of loci: 장소를 활용한 기억법
** rodent: 설치류 동물
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
Imitation seems to be a key to the transmission of 
valuable practices among nonhumans. The most famous 
example is that of the macaque monkeys on the island of 
Koshima in Japan.
(A) In the early 1950s, Imo, a one-year-old female macaque, 
somehow hit upon the idea of washing her sweet potatoes 
in a stream before eating them. Soon it was hard to find a 
Koshima macaque who wasn’t careful to wash off her 
sweet potato before eating it. 
(B) Imo, though, realized that if you threw a handful of wheat 
and sand into the ocean, the sand would sink and the 
wheat would float. Again, within a few years most of her 
fellow macaques were throwing wheat and sand into the 
sea and obtaining the benefits.
(C) A few years later, Imo introduced another innovation. 
Researchers on the island occasionally gave the monkeys 
wheat (in addition to sweet potatoes). But the wheat was 
given to them on the beach, where it quickly became 
mixed with sand.
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
That is why people experience jet lag when traveling 
across time zones.
In humans, body clocks are responsible for daily changes in 
blood pressure, body temperature, hormones, hunger, and 
thirst, as well as our sleep-wake cycles. ( ① ) These biological 
rhythms, which we experience as internal time, are probably 
older than sleep, developed over the course of millions of years 
of evolution. ( ② ) They facilitate physiological and 
behavioral changes on a roughly twenty-four-hour cycle no 
matter what is happening outside, whether a cold front moves 
in or clouds block the light of the sun. ( ③ ) Their internal 
clocks continue to run in accordance with the place they left 
behind, not the one to which they have come, and it can take 
some time to realign the two. ( ④ ) The most remarkable thing 
is that our internal body clocks can be readjusted by 
environmental cues. ( ⑤ ) We may get jet lag for a few days 
when we ask our body clocks to adapt to a vastly different 
schedule of day and night cycles on the other side of the Earth, 
but they can do it. [3점]
* facilitate: 쉽게 하다
** realign: 재조정하다
39.
For example, the first step in servicing or installing 
equipment is talking with the clients to understand how 
they used the equipment.
The customer service representatives in an electronics firm 
under major restructuring were told they had to begin selling 
service contracts for their equipment in addition to installing 
and repairing them. This generated a great deal of resistance. 
( ① ) To the service representatives, learning to sell was a 
very different game from what they had been playing. ( ② ) 
But it turned out they already knew a lot more about sales 
than they thought. ( ③ ) The same is true in selling. ( ④ ) 
The salesperson first has to learn about the customer’s needs. 
( ⑤ ) The service representatives also had a great deal of 
product knowledge and hands-on experience, which is 
obviously important in sales.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), 
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Lawyers and scientists use argument to mean a summary 
of evidence and principles leading to a conclusion; 
however, a scientific argument is different from a legal 
argument. A prosecuting attorney constructs an argument 
to persuade the judge or a jury that the accused is guilty; a 
defense attorney in the same trial constructs an argument 
to persuade the same judge or jury toward the opposite 
conclusion. Neither prosecutor nor defender is obliged to 
consider anything that weakens their respective cases. On 
the contrary, scientists construct arguments because they 
want to test their own ideas and give an accurate 
explanation of some aspect of nature. Scientists can 
include any evidence or hypothesis that supports their 
claim, but they must observe one fundamental rule of 
professional science. They must include all of the known 
evidence and all of the hypotheses previously proposed. 
Unlike lawyers, scientists must explicitly account for the 
possibility that they might be wrong.
󰀻
Unlike lawyers, who utilize information 
(A)
 to 
support their arguments, scientists must include all 
information even if some of it is unlikely to 
(B)
 
their arguments.
(A)
(B)
① objectively …… weaken
② objectively …… support
③ accurately …… clarify
④ selectively …… strengthen
⑤ selectively …… disprove
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
The idea of protecting intellectual activity and creation has 
deep roots. The ancient Greeks used an awards system to 
(A)
 design achievements, which performed some of 
the same functions as the modern patent system. Their 
pottery, sculptures, and other manufactured goods had 
symbols on them to note the tradesmen who created them, 
which are the predecessors of modern trademarks. Similar 
marks and symbols functioning as trademarks have been 
found on Chinese pottery, possibly dating as far back as 
2698 BCE, and in many other ancient societies, including the 
Egyptians, the Assyrians, and the Vedic civilization.
The concept of intellectual property continued to develop 
during the Roman period. The Roman Empire had an 
incredible variety of trademarks. Roman potters alone used 
approximately 6,000 trademarks. Additionally, Roman 
authors had a sense that their intellectual creations were 
(B)
, as they complained about the exploitation of 
those creations. Their sense of injustice was probably 
heightened by the fact that there were laws and traditions in 
place that supported their belief that only they could exploit 
their creations. Roman authors could, in fact, make money 
from the copying and publishing of their works because the 
value of their intellectual creations was recognized.
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Early Development of Intellectual Property Protection
② History of Roman Intellectual Property Law
③ How the Romans Protected Their Properties
④ Increasing Demand to Protect Ancient Artifacts
⑤ Why Trademarks Were Exploited in Early Civilizations
42. 윗글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
(A)
(B)
① recognize …… valuable
② recognize …… outdated
③ honor
…… ignorable
④ suspend
…… imitable
⑤ suspend
…… significant
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Richard was watching people on the street through the 
window. Skirts were bouncing lightly and pants were 
dancing delightedly in the seasonable weather as the spring 
breeze chased them playfully. Some seemed excited, walking 
like racing cars between passersby. He had ordered two 
black coffees, one for himself and one for his friend, Julie. 
She was running late, but the service was fast. The hot 
coffees were promptly placed in front of (a) him.
(B)
Handing a spray can of cream over to Richard, the waiter 
said, “Add it now if you want.” Richard couldn’t help asking 
him why. (b) The blue-shirted man answered, “Actually, 
hotter coffee loses energy faster than coffee cooled slightly 
by the addition of cream.” “Really? Is that so?” The waiter 
kindly smiled and said, “Yeah, I just learned it when I took a 
class about coffee.” He also taught (c) his customer how to 
make shapes with the cream. Richard paid close attention to 
his explanation.
(C)
Looking at the coffees, Richard remembered that Julie 
liked whipped cream on top of her hot coffee. He was 
wondering if it was better to put the cream on now, or wait 
till she arrived. “Since the cream is cold, it’ll cool down the 
coffee faster,” he reasoned. Beep! It was a text message from 
her. “I’ll be there in 5 minutes. Please put some cream on my 
coffee.” He was startled, because she seemed to know 
what he was thinking about. (d) Richard called over a 
waiter wearing a blue shirt and asked him for whipped cream.
(D)
Richard thanked the waiter. Following his instructions, 
Richard made a flower with the cream. He tried to be as 
precise as he could. No sooner had he completed his 
masterpiece, Julie stepped into the cafe. As she sat down, she 
saw her coffee. “Wow, look at that! A white flower in the cup! 
It looks so beautiful, Richard! It’s too lovely to drink,” his 
friend said. “Try it,” (e) the happy man urged her. She tasted 
it. “This coffee is absolutely delicious, too!” Talking and 
laughing over coffee, they enjoyed the fabulous spring day.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)
② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
것은?
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 Richard에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 어느 봄날 카페에서 길거리의 사람들을 바라보았다.
② 자신과 Julie를 위해 뜨거운 커피를 두 잔 주문했다.
③ 커피와 크림에 대해 웨이터와 대화를 나누었다.
④ 크림을 넣을지 알아보기 위해 Julie에게 문자를 보냈다.
⑤ Julie가 마실 커피 위에 꽃 모양을 만들었다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
