
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Organizer,
My name is Cathy Cameron. I’m writing in regards 
to the “Boston Red Sox Baseball Trip” for the game 
with the Yankees taking place on Saturday, September 
3rd. Unfortunately, I have just become aware that your 
company’s limit of 53 people for registration has already 
been reached. However, I would really appreciate it if you 
could allow my son to register additionally. He is a big fan 
of the Red Sox, and this trip would make a great surprise gift 
for his birthday. If there is any way that he is able to join the 
trip, I would be very grateful. I’m sure it would give him the 
perfect birthday. I look forward to hearing from you soon.
Yours sincerely,
Cathy Cameron
① 야구와 관련된 새로운 사업을 제안하려고 
② 야구 경기 관람권 구매 대행을 요청하려고
③ 아들 생일 파티를 위한 장소 예약을 취소하려고
④ 주말 가족 여행 일정 변경이 가능한지 문의하려고
⑤ 야구 경기 관람 여행에 아들의 추가 등록을 부탁하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘Amy’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? 
Amy was in the classroom staring out of the window 
beside her. She thought how her gloomy face in the window 
reflected her mistake. She tried not to think about her terrible 
performance in class. Watching Amy look so discouraged, 
Laurie, her best friend, decided she needed some cheering up. 
So Laurie crossed her eyes and made a stupid face. Amy tried 
not to look, but Laurie was making another funny face. This 
time she couldn’t help turning back to see what her friend was 
doing. It was her famous fish face: she was pushing her ears 
out, crossing her eyes, and opening her mouth wide. Amy 
laughed hard. She felt that she was lucky to have a friend that 
could always cheer her up when she was feeling down.
① relaxed
→ frustrated
② satisfied → ashamed
③ bored
→ exhausted
④ excited
→ frightened
⑤ depressed → comforted
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
My barely-five-year-old son couldn’t go to bed one night until 
he wrote “I love you Mom” on a piece of paper. Pajamas on, red 
crayon in hand, he was very determined. A few mixed-up letters, 
a couple of crumpled papers, and some help from Daddy later, 
he handed me his heart on the page. Then, finally, he relaxed 
enough to fall asleep. Sometimes, saying how you feel just isn’t 
enough. Spoken words are invisible and untouchable. Write 
it down, however, and you can see it, feel it, hold it, keep it 
forever. Although we may think it, we can’t really give someone 
our heart. But by writing, we can give someone our heart on a 
page. A love note is a piece of paper that is a little piece of your 
heart. Teach your child how to write love notes, and I promise 
you will have many, many happy returns.
* crumpled: 구겨진
① 자녀의 활동에 동참하여 유대감을 강화하라.
② 자녀가 글을 통해 마음을 표현하도록 가르치라.
③ 자녀가 부모의 사랑을 느낄 수 있도록 행동하라.
④ 자녀에게 대화를 통해 자연스럽게 감정을 표현하라.
⑤ 자녀의 인지 능력 향상을 위해 글쓰기 교육을 하라.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
One of the most demanding, and at the same time inspiring, 
aspects of translating for children is the potential for such 
creativity that arises from what Peter Hollindale has called the 
‘childness’ of children’s texts: ‘the quality of being a child ―
dynamic, imaginative, experimental, interactive and unstable’. 
The ‘unstable’ qualities of childhood that Hollindale cites 
require a writer or translator to have an understanding of the 
freshness of language to the child’s eye and ear, the child’s 
affective concerns and the linguistic and dramatic play of 
early childhood. Translating sound, for example, whether in 
the read-aloud qualities of books for the younger child, in 
animal noises, children’s poetry or in nonsense rhymes, 
demands imaginative solutions ― as indeed does working with 
visual material. Such multi-faceted creativity has, at times, 
placed children’s literature at the forefront of imaginative  
experimentation.
* multi-faceted: 다면의
① 아동문학 번역에서는 아동의 특성에 기반을 둔 창의성이 요구된다.
② 아동문학 속 다양한 의성어는 아동의 창의성 발달에 도움이 된다.
③ 아동문학 번역가는 아동의 태도를 긍정적으로 변화시키는 데 기여한다.
④ 아동문학가는 아동의 성장 과정을 구체적으로 표현할 수 있어야 한다.
⑤ 아동문학은 아동 언어 발달에 도움이 되는 다양한 요소들을 담고 있다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
From an evolutionary perspective, fear has contributed to 
both fostering and limiting change, and to preserving the 
species. We are programmed to be afraid. It is a survival need, 
as is stability, which is another force of nature that can limit 
the capacity to change. Stable patterns are necessary lest we 
live in chaos; however, they make it difficult to abandon 
entrenched behaviors, even those that are no longer useful, 
constructive, or health creating. And fear can keep you from 
changing when you don’t want to risk a step into unknown 
territory; for example, some people choose not to leave an 
unfulfilling job or a failing relationship because they fear the 
unknown more than the known. On the other hand, fear can 
also motivate change in order to avoid something you’re afraid 
of, such as dying young ― as one of your parents might have. 
* entrenched: 굳어버린 
① fear’s negative roles in cases of chaos
② effective strategies for maintaining stability
③ fear and its dual functions in terms of change
④ the necessities of reducing a fear of the unknown
⑤ ways of confronting fear to overcome difficulties in life
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
A strategic vision has little value to the organization unless 
it’s effectively communicated down the line to lower-level 
managers and employees. It would be difficult for a vision 
statement to provide direction to decision makers and energize 
employees toward achieving long-term strategic intent unless 
they know of the vision and observe management’s commitment 
to that vision. Communicating the vision to organization 
members nearly always means putting “where we are going and 
why” in writing, distributing the statement organizationwide, 
and having executives personally explain the vision and its 
justification to as many people as possible. Ideally, executives 
should present their vision for the company in a manner that 
reaches out and grabs people’s attention. An engaging and 
convincing strategic vision has enormous motivational value ―
for the same reason that a stone mason is inspired by building 
a great cathedral for the ages. 
* stone mason: 석공   ** cathedral: 대성당
① What Makes a Strategic Vision Successful?
② Why Is Creating a Vision Statement Difficult?
③ Building a Future: Innovative Leadership Training
④ Effective Decision-Making Processes in Organizations
⑤ Motivating Employees through Organizational Development
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은? 
The above graph shows the percentage of Americans in 
different age groups who said it was “generally OK” to use a 
cellphone in different settings in 2014. ① In the setting of “On 
public transportation,” the younger groups are more accepting 
than the older ones regarding cellphone use. ② “When walking 
down the street” is the setting in which people aged 30-49 are 
more permissive towards cellphone use than the other age 
groups. ③ As for “At restaurants,” 50% of the 18-29 year olds 
answer that it is acceptable to use cellphones while 26% of those 
65 and older say the same. ④ Only 4% of people in each of the 
two age groups, 30-49 and 50-64, agree that cellphone use is 
acceptable in the setting of “At movie theaters or other quiet 
places.” ⑤ In the same setting, less than 10% of people in each 
age group answer that it is acceptable to use cellphones.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. !Kung San에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The !Kung San, also known as the Bushmen, live in the 
Kalahari Desert in southern Africa. The “!K” in the name 
“!Kung” is like the sound that occurs when a cork is pulled 
from a bottle. Traditionally, they lived by hunting and 
gathering, the way of life that was the universal mode of 
human existence until 10,000 years ago. The total population 
of the !Kung San in 1986 was about 15,000, with most of 
them living in nonhunting and gathering situations on 
cattleposts or farms. The !Kung San in the Dobe area of 
Botswana were divided into twenty five groups with a mean 
size of eighteen to twenty people. The !Kung San in that area 
had abundant food supply and a lot of leisure time. The main 
food crop was the wild mongongo nut, millions of which were 
harvested every year.
① 남부 아프리카 Kalahari 사막에 산다.
② 이름 속 “!K”는 병에서 코르크 마개를 뽑을 때 나는 소리와 유사하다.
③ 1986년에 전체 인구가 약 15,000명이었다.
④ Botswana의 Dobe 지역에서는 25개의 그룹으로 나뉘어 있었다.
⑤ Dobe 지역에서 식량은 부족했지만 여가 시간은 많았다.
26. 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 스포츠센터 개장일은 11월 30일이다.
② 응모작 제출은 웹사이트에서 진행된다.
③ 최상위 응모작 세 개가 온라인 투표 대상이 된다. 
④ 투표는 두 달 동안 웹사이트에서 진행된다.
⑤ 우승 상품은 스포츠센터 1년 회원권이다.
27. Fashion Career Discovery Day에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
일치하는 것은?
① 전문 디자이너들과의 인터뷰는 포함되어 있지 않다.
② 11월 5일부터 이틀간 진행된다. 
③ 티켓 가격에 점심과 기념품이 포함된다.
④ 10명부터 단체 할인이 적용된다.
⑤ 예약하지 않아도 참가할 수 있다.
28. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 
적절한 것은? [3점]
Like life in traditional society, but unlike other team sports, 
baseball is not governed by the clock. A football game is 
comprised of exactly sixty minutes of play, a basketball game 
forty or forty-eight minutes, but baseball has no set length of time 
within which the game must be completed. The pace of the game 
is therefore leisurely and (A) unhurried / unhurriedly, like the 
world before the discipline of measured time, deadlines, 
schedules, and wages paid by the hour. Baseball belongs to the 
kind of world (B) which / in which people did not say, “I haven’t 
got all day.” Baseball games do have all day to be played. But that 
does not mean that they can go on forever. Baseball, like 
traditional life, proceeds according to the rhythm of nature, 
specifically the rotation of the Earth. During its first half century, 
games were not played at night, which meant that baseball games, 
like the traditional work day, (C) ending / ended when the sun set.
(A)
(B)
(C)
① unhurried
…… in which …… ended
② unhurried
…… which
…… ending
③ unhurriedly …… which
…… ended
④ unhurriedly …… which
…… ending
⑤ unhurriedly …… in which …… ended
Name Our Sports Center!
The grand opening of our brand-new sports 
center is on November 30th, but we still don’t 
have a name! Please take this opportunity to be part of 
Watford Community history, and help us name it!
Entry Submission
∙September 1st—30th on our website (www.watfordcc.org)
The three best entries will be selected by the Watford 
volunteer group and will be made available online for 
voting to decide the winner.
Vote
∙October 15th—31st on our website
Winner Announcement
∙November 3rd on our website
∙Prize: a one-year sports center membership
We’re looking for the most dynamic and fun names, 
so get your entries in now!
Watford Community Council 
Fashion Career Discovery Day
Experience our Fashion Career Discovery Day and unlock 
pathways to a fulfilling career in fashion! Your day will 
include interviews with professional designers, as well as the 
opportunity to watch a fashion show.
Date: Saturday, November 5, 2016
Time: 10 a.m.—4 p.m. 
Location: Pavilion Fashion Plaza
716 East Livera Street
Ticket Price: $20 per person (lunch and souvenir included)
A minimum of 15 participants is necessary for group 
bookings to receive a 10% discount.
Reservations are required and must be made on our website 
(www.pfp2016.org) by 6 p.m., Thursday, November 3, 2016. 
Please email us at fashioncdd@pfp2016.org for further 
information.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 
적절한 것은?
You can’t have a democracy if you can’t talk with your 
neighbors about matters of mutual interest or concern. Thomas 
Jefferson, who had an enduring interest in democracy, came 
to a similar conclusion. He was prescient in understanding 
the dangers of (A) concentrated / limited power, whether in 
corporations or in political leaders or exclusionary political 
institutions. Direct involvement of citizens was what had made 
the American Revolution possible and given the new republic 
vitality and hope for the future. Without that involvement, the 
republic would die. Eventually, he saw a need for the nation to 
be (B) blended / subdivided into “wards” ― political units so 
small that everyone living there could participate directly in 
the political process. The representatives for each ward in the 
capital would have to be (C) resistant / responsive to citizens 
organized in this way. A vibrant democracy conducted locally 
would then provide the active basic unit for the democratic life 
of the republic. With that kind of involvement, the republic might 
survive and prosper.
* prescient: 선견지명이 있는   ** vibrant: 활력이 넘치는
(A)
(B)
(C)
① concentrated …… blended
…… resistant
② concentrated …… subdivided …… responsive
③ concentrated …… subdivided …… resistant
④ limited
…… subdivided …… resistant
⑤ limited
…… blended
…… responsive
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Harumi Tanaka, from Osaka, Japan, had accepted an 
assignment in Boston. His task was to explore the possibility 
of developing joint ventures with American firms. ① He had 
been invited by one company to spend a month there and 
had been assigned an office and a research assistant. Harumi 
agreed on a Monday to present a business plan the following 
Friday. On Tuesday, the computers in the company crashed, 
and the research assistant called in sick with a severe case of 
the flu. Still, Harumi pushed forward and presented ② his 
plan on Friday. He began his presentation, “I’m sorry that 
③ I am not well prepared. This meeting may not be a good 
use of your time.” He then went into a clear, interesting 
presentation. After the meeting, one of the American executives 
said, “④ I don’t know why you had to apologize. Everyone 
knows about the computer crash and your assistant’s illness.” 
Harumi responded that he thought that the apology would be 
a good introduction to ⑤ his presentation.
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. A sleeping mother has the ability to identify the particular 
cry of her own baby. This is one of the bonding factors that 
has been forgotten because of the way in which we live today. 
Typically, there is now only one newborn baby in any family 
house or apartment, so there is no way to test this ability. In 
an ancient tribe, however, living in small huts in a tiny village 
settlement, a mother would have been able to hear any of the 
babies crying in the night. If she woke up every time one of 
them screamed for food, she might get no sleep at all. During 
the course of evolution she became programmed to awake 
only at the sound of her own particular baby. This 
 
is still there to this day, even though it is seldom used. [3점]
① affection
② creativity
③ sociability
④ intolerance
⑤ sensitivity
32. When people try to control situations that are essentially 
uncontrollable, they are inclined to experience high levels of 
stress. Thus, suggesting that they need to take active control is 
bad advice in those situations. What they need to do is to accept 
that some things are beyond their control. Similarly, teaching 
people to accept a situation that could readily be changed could 
be bad advice; sometimes the only way to get what you want is 
to take active control. Research has shown that when people who 
feel helpless fail to take control, they experience negative 
emotional states such as anxiety and depression. Like stress, 
these negative emotions can damage the immune response. We 
can see from this that health is not linearly related to control. For 
optimum health, people should be encouraged to take control to 
a point 
. [3점]
① but to yield to the situations within their control
② but to disregard immune response when stressed 
③ but to recognize when further control is impossible
④ and to fight against uncontrollable situations persistently
⑤ and to try harder to conquer uncontrollable stressful situations
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. A good deal of the information stored in working memory is 
encoded in an auditory form, especially when the information is 
language based. For example, in an early study by Conrad, adults 
were shown six-letter sequences, with letters being presented 
visually, one at a time, at intervals of three-fourths of a second. 
As soon as the last letter of a sequence had been presented, 
participants in the study wrote down all six of the letters they had 
seen, guessing at any letters they couldn’t easily recall. When 
people recalled letters incorrectly, the letters they said they had 
seen were more likely to resemble the actual stimuli in terms 
of 
. 
For example, the letter F was “remembered” as the auditorially 
similar letter S 131 times but as the visually similar letter P only 
14 times. Similarly, the letter V was remembered as B 56 times 
but as X only 5 times. [3점]
① how the letters were visually represented
② how the letters sounded than how they looked
③ how the length of the letter sequence was recognized
④ how the letters were ordered than how they were pronounced
⑤ how often the letters appeared than how long they were shown
34. Even if it is correct to say that we express and represent 
our thoughts in language, it may be a big mistake to suppose 
that there are structural similarities between what is doing the 
representing and what is represented. Robert Stalnaker, in his 
book Inquiry, suggests an analogy with the representation of 
numbers: The number 9 can be represented as ‘12—3’ but it 
does not follow that 12, 3, or subtraction are constituents of 
the number 9. We could compare a thought and its verbal 
expression with toothpaste and its ‘expression’ from a tube. 
That the result of expressing toothpaste is a long, thin, 
cylinder does not entail that toothpaste itself is long, thin, or 
cylindrical. Similarly, a thought might get expressed out loud 
in a statement with a particular linguistic structure. It does not 
follow that 
. 
Suppose, for example, that I look at a fruit bowl, and think 
that there is an apple and an orange in that bowl. The objects 
in front of my eyes include some pieces of fruit and a bowl, 
but no object corresponding to the word ‘and’ exists either in 
the world or in my visual image. [3점]
* subtraction: 빼기   ** entail: 의미(함의)하다
① the thought itself has such a structure
② linguistic analysis of a thought is unlikely
③ the language in mind lacks a logical structure 
④ a thought and its verbal expression are distinct
⑤ the sentence structurally differs from the thought
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은? 
The pull effect of a destination can be positively influenced 
by the introduction and reinforcement of pro-tourism policies 
that make a destination more accessible. ① Governments, for 
example, can and often do employ awareness campaigns 
among the resident population to promote a welcoming attitude 
towards visitors, in order to foster a positive market image. 
② However, because such campaigns depend on widespread 
social engineering, and because their effects can be 
counteracted by random acts of violence, positive outcomes 
cannot be guaranteed. ③ Most governments in developing 
countries encourage international tourism because tourists 
from wealthy countries usually spend more. ④ Furthermore, 
it is the behaviour of some tourists, and the structure and 
development of tourism itself, that often generate negative 
attitudes within the host community. ⑤ This implies that major 
structural changes to tourism itself, rather than awareness 
campaigns, may be required to foster a welcoming attitude. 
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
Psychologists Dember and Earl suggested that the 
motivation for exploration had its roots in a curiosity drive.
(A) This is very important for understanding why people will 
often return to explore things that they explored before or 
do things they have done before. In our daily lives, for 
example, we might decide to listen to a piece of music that 
we have listened to many times.
(B) By returning to that music with a new or fresh perspective, 
perhaps as a result of listening to other music, we find 
something new and interesting. One reason that people can 
play a card game such as bridge over and over is that no 
matter how many times you have played the game, it will be 
different in some way. 
(C) They suggested that curiosity is stimulated by novelty and 
argued that novelty is in the eye of the beholder. We 
could have seen something many times before, but as the 
result of having new skills or competence, we discover 
new or different aspects of that object.
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
The hunters, armed only with primitive weapons, were 
no real match for an angry mammoth. Many were probably 
killed or severely injured in the close encounters that were 
necessary to slay one of these gigantic animals. 
(A) Some of them may have traveled by small boat along the 
coast, but many walked. Twenty thousand years ago, at the 
height of the last glacial period, sea level was so low that 
dry land joined what are now separate continents.
(B) But the rewards were great when one was brought down. 
A single mammoth could feed, clothe, and supply a band 
for a long time. The hunters had followed the mammoths 
and other large animals eastward from Asia across what is 
now the Bering Sea.
(C) Slowly, imperceptibly, and probably unconsciously, hunters 
had moved across the land bridge and become the first 
immigrants to the new land. Without the ice age, North 
America might have remained unpopulated for thousands 
of years more.
* slay: 죽이다
① (A) — (C) — (B)
② (B) — (A) — (C)
③ (B) — (C) — (A)
④ (C) — (A) — (B)
⑤ (C) — (B) — (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
Even so, research confirms the finding that nonverbal cues 
are more credible than verbal cues, especially when verbal 
and nonverbal cues conflict.
Researchers have reported various nonverbal features of 
sarcasm. ( ① ) Most disagree as to whether nonverbal cues 
are essential to the perception of sarcasm or the emotion that 
prompts it. ( ② ) Also, nonverbal cues are better indicators 
of speaker intent. ( ③ ) As the nature of sarcasm implies a 
contradiction between intent and message, nonverbal cues 
may “leak” and reveal the speaker’s true mood as they do 
in deception. ( ④ ) Ostensibly, sarcasm is the opposite of 
deception in that a sarcastic speaker typically intends the 
receiver to recognize the sarcastic intent; whereas, in deception 
the speaker typically intends that the receiver not recognize 
the deceptive intent. ( ⑤ ) Thus, when communicators are 
attempting to determine if a speaker is sarcastic, they compare 
the verbal and nonverbal message and if the two are in 
opposition, communicators may conclude that the speaker is 
being sarcastic.
* sarcasm: 비꼼   ** ostensibly: 표면상
39.
This dynamic can be illustrated with the example of 
parents who place equal value on convenience and concern 
for the environment.
Our total set of values and their relative importance to us 
constitute our value system. ( ① ) The way that we behave in 
a given situation is often influenced by how important one 
value is to us relative to others. ( ② ) For instance, deciding 
whether to spend Saturday afternoon relaxing with your family 
or exercising will be determined by the relative importance 
that you place on family versus health. ( ③ ) You feel value 
conflict when you do something that is consistent with one 
value but inconsistent with another equally important value. 
( ④ ) They may experience value conflict if they buy 
disposable diapers for their babies. ( ⑤ ) Consumers facing 
such decisions consider not only the product’s immediate 
consumption outcomes but also the product’s general effect 
on society, including how the manufacturer behaves (e.g., 
toward the environment).
* diaper: 기저귀
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), 
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
In science one experiment, whether it succeeds or fails, is 
logically followed by another in a theoretically infinite 
progression. According to the underlying myth of modern 
science, this progression is always replacing the smaller 
knowledge of the past with the larger knowledge of the 
present, which will be replaced by the yet larger knowledge 
of the future. In the arts, by contrast, no limitless sequence of 
works is ever implied or looked for. No work of art is 
necessarily followed by a second work that is necessarily 
better. Given the methodologies of science, the law of gravity 
and the genome were bound to be discovered by somebody; 
the identity of the discoverer is incidental to the fact. But it 
appears that in the arts there are no second chances. We must 
assume that we had one chance each for The Divine Comedy 
and King Lear. If Dante and Shakespeare had died before 
they wrote those works, nobody ever would have written them.
󰀻
While scientific knowledge is believed to progress through 
(A)
experiments, an artistic work tends to be 
(B)
to its creator with no limitless sequence implied.
(A)
(B)
① successive
…… unique
② successive
…… valuable
③ controlled
…… valuable
④ incidental
…… influential
⑤ incidental
…… unique
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Three composers attended a show at the Café Concert des 
Ambassadeurs. There they heard performances of a song written 
by one of them and a sketch written by the other two. After the 
performance, the three refused to pay their bill, telling the owner 
of the café: ‘You use the products of our labour without paying 
us for it. So there’s no reason why we should pay for your 
service’. The case went to court, and the composers won on 
appeal. The decision extended an existing law on theatrical 
performances to all musical works and all public performance 
of those works. This decision created a new category of legal 
right ― the performing right ― and with it a new economic 
relationship between music user and copyright owner. 
As a result of the decision, these composers and others 
including music publishers founded a society to enforce and 
administer their performing rights. In doing so, they 
established the principle and practice of the collective 
administration of rights, based on the fact that ― with the 
possible 
exception 
of 
opera 
performances ― it 
was 
impossible for a single composer or publisher to monitor 
every use of his or her work by singers, bands, promoters or, 
in the twentieth century, broadcasters. 
, the new 
society was entrusted with the task of monitoring music use, 
issuing licences to music users, negotiating fees, collecting 
fees and finally distributing the money raised to the 
composers and songwriters whose works were adding value 
to other people’s businesses.
41. 윗글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① the cultural significance of musical performance
② strategies for creating public interest through music
③ the rise of performing rights in music and its effects
④ performing arts for the public and their artistic value
⑤ the influence of the new society on increasing licence fees
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Accordingly
② Nevertheless
③ Otherwise
④ Conversely
⑤ Similarly
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
What interested me the most about the new house was the 
stable in the backyard, in which my father let me make a 
small space for a pony. I believed that it meant that I would 
get a pony for Christmas. (a) He also said, “Lennie, someday 
you’ll have a pony of your own.” However, “some day” is a 
pain to a boy who lives in and knows only “now.”
Meanwhile my father took me to a pony fair and let me try 
some ponies, but (b) he always found some fault with them, 
leaving me in despair. When Christmas was at hand, I had 
abandoned all hope of getting one. Instead, I hung up the 
biggest stocking I had. Waking up at 7 a.m., my little sisters 
and I raced for the fireplace downstairs. While my sisters 
were delighted to find their stockings filled with presents, 
mine was empty. I went out into the yard and wept all by 
myself. 
After an hour, my frustration reached its climax, when I saw 
a man riding a pony with a brand-new saddle. When he looked 
at our door, he just passed by, which caused me to break into a 
flood of tears. Then, he said, “Kid, do you know a boy named 
Lennie Steffens?” “That’s me,” I replied in tears. He said, 
“I’ve been looking all over for your house. Why don’t you put 
your house number where it can be seen?” He went on saying, 
“I should have been here at 7. Your father told me to bring the 
pony here and leave (c) him for you.”
I’d never seen anything so beautiful as my pony. And finally, 
I rode off into the fields. Thrilled by riding, I began to feast my 
eyes on the world around me. The trees seemed to be taking on 
smiling faces and the birds seemed to be singing to congratulate 
me on getting my new friend. When I returned home, my father 
asked, “Why did you come back so soon?” With a smile on my 
face, I answered (d) him, “I didn’t want to make him feel tired. 
It’s his first day with me.” (e) He laughed and wiped away the 
tear stains from my face ― his heartfelt gesture of apology for 
such a long-delayed present. Bursting with happiness, I spent 
the rest of the day brushing my pony in the stable.
* stable: 마구간
43. 윗글의 마지막 단락에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
① witty and humorous
② joyful and heartwarming
③ gloomy and hopeless
④ mysterious and adventurous
⑤ desperate and discouraging
44. 밑줄 친 (a) ～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 아버지는 Lennie에게 조랑말을 위한 공간을 마련하도록 하였다.
② 아버지는 Lennie를 조랑말 시장에 데리고 갔다.
③ Lennie의 여동생들은 크리스마스 선물을 받지 못했다.
④ Lennie는 조랑말을 예정보다 늦게 받았다.
⑤ Lennie는 마구간에서 조랑말을 솔질해 주었다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
