
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear staff,
Next Monday, Nature’s Beauty Gardens will have the pleasure 
of hosting very important guests for the annual “Toddler Trek” 
event. We hope that this will be fun, educational, and most 
importantly safe for the toddlers. Parents and children are going 
to spend time enjoying outdoor activities and having a picnic 
lunch. It is therefore very important to check the garden for 
potential dangers. Managers of each department must make sure 
that all dangerous equipment and machinery are safely stored. 
Also, for the safety of our guests at this event, garden chemicals 
will not be used anywhere in Nature’s Beauty Gardens. Thank 
you for your cooperation in this safety check and for helping to 
make this year’s “Toddler Trek” event the best one yet.
Best regards,
Laura Alfaro, Managing Director
① 안전한 행사를 위한 준비를 지시하려고
② 노후 장비 교체 일정을 안내하려고
③ 체험 학습 행사 홍보를 부탁하려고
④ 정원 박람회 기획자를 모집하려고 
⑤ 체육 대회 참가를 독려하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Ms. Baker의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
“Regularity is the key to mastery, Jean. Everything other 
than that is a waste of time,” stressed Ms. Baker, Jean’s piano 
teacher, with a troubled look. However, Jean complained quite 
often about practicing and slipped out of her sessions 
occasionally. Concerned about Jean idling around, Ms. Baker 
decided to change her teaching method. “You can make your 
own schedule, Jean. However, I want you to help me as an 
assistant,” said Ms. Baker. After that, Jean practiced hard to 
be a good example to the beginners and her skills improved 
incredibly day after day. The change in Jean was miraculous. 
A smile came over Ms. Baker’s face as she listened to Jean 
play. Ms. Baker was convinced by Jean’s improvement that 
her new teaching method was a success.
① angry
→ jealous
② indifferent → grateful
③ worried → satisfied
④ pleased
→ confused
⑤ alarmed → frustrated
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
We say to ourselves: “There is plenty of time. I’ll manage 
somehow or other when the time comes for action.” We are 
rather proud of our ability to meet emergencies. So we do not 
plan and take precautions to prevent emergencies from 
arising. It is too easy to drift through school and college, 
taking the traditional, conventional studies that others take, 
following the lines of least resistance, electing “snap courses,” 
and going with the crowd. It is too easy to take the attitude: 
“First I will get my education and develop myself, and then I 
will know better what I am fitted to do for a life work.” And 
so we drift, driven by the winds of circumstance, tossed about 
by the waves of tradition and custom. Eventually, most men 
find they must be satisfied with “any port in a storm.” Sailors 
who select a port because they are driven to it have scarcely 
one chance in a thousand of dropping anchor in the right one.
* snap: 쉬운
① 강인한 의지를 가지고 학업을 지속해야 한다.
② 전통적 가치를 바탕으로 앞날을 계획해야 한다.
③ 타인과의 소통을 통해 경험의 폭을 넓혀야 한다.
④ 자신의 고집을 버리고 비판적 의견을 수용해야 한다. 
⑤ 안일함을 버리고 미래를 준비하는 자세를 가져야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은? 
Internet entrepreneurs are creating job-search products and 
bringing them online regularly. Within the past few years, 
new Internet-based businesses have come online that help 
people find internships, complete online classes tailored to 
individual employer job applications, or find volunteer work 
that will lead to full-time employment. Job mastery will mean 
keeping up with the rapidly evolving tools available on the 
Internet. It should be noted, though, that no development in 
the Internet job age has reduced the importance of the most 
basic job search skill: self-knowledge. Even in the Internet 
age, the job search starts with identifying individual job skills, 
sector interests, and preferred workplace environment and 
interests. Richard Bolles’ best selling job search book, first 
published in 1970, had as its central theme the self-inventory 
of skills and workplace preferences. This self-inventory continues 
to be the starting point for any job search today no matter 
what the Internet technology involved.
* entrepreneur: 사업가  ** inventory: 목록
① 구직 정보 검색 도구가 빠르게 발전하고 있다.
② 인터넷 관련 일자리 창출을 위한 기업의 투자가 시급하다.
③ 인터넷을 활용한 구직에서도 자신에 대한 이해가 중요하다.
④ 업무 효율을 높이려면 인터넷 작업 환경 개선이 필요하다.
⑤ 인터넷을 통한 직업 교육이 확산되는 추세이다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
The term “biological control” has been used, at times, in a 
broad context to cover a full spectrum of biological organisms 
and biologically based products. This has been spectacularly 
successful in many instances, with a number of pest problems 
permanently resolved by importation and successful establishment 
of natural enemies. These importation successes have been 
limited largely to certain types of ecosystems and/or pest 
situations such as introduced pests in perennial ecosystems. 
On the other hand, this approach has met with limited success 
for major pests of row crops or other ephemeral systems. In 
these situations, the problem is often not the lack of effective 
natural enemies but management practices and a lack of 
concerted research on factors that determine the success or 
failure of importation attempts in the specific agro-ecosystem 
setting. Thus, importation programs, to date, are largely a 
matter of trial and error based on experience of the individual 
specialists involved. 
* perennial: 다년생의  ** ephemeral: 단명하는
① difficulties in identifying major pests in agriculture
② benefits of introducing natural enemies into ecosystems  
③ ways to apply biological control strategies to agriculture
④ side effects from pest elimination through biological control
⑤ reasons for partial success of importation in biological control
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
According to the individualist form of rhetoric about science, 
still much used for certain purposes, discoveries are made in 
laboratories. They are the product of inspired patience, of 
skilled hands and an inquiring but unbiased mind. Moreover, 
they speak for themselves, or at least they speak too powerfully 
and too insistently for prejudiced humans to silence them. It 
would be wrong to suppose that such beliefs are not sincerely 
held, yet almost nobody thinks they can provide a basis for 
action in public contexts. Any scientist who announces a so-called 
discovery at a press conference without first permitting expert 
reviewers to examine his or her claims is automatically castigated 
as a publicity seeker. The norms of scientific communication 
presuppose that nature does not speak unambiguously, and that 
knowledge isn’t knowledge unless it has been authorized by 
disciplinary specialists. A scientific truth has little standing 
until it becomes a collective product. What happens in somebody’s 
laboratory is only one stage in its construction.
* rhetoric: 수사(학)  ** castigate: 혹평하다
① Path to Scientific Truth: Scientific Community’s Approval
② The Prime Rule of Science: First Means Best
③ The Lonely Genius Drives Scientific Discoveries 
④ Scientific Discoveries Speak for Themselves!
⑤ Social Prejudice Presents Obstacles to Scientific Research 
24. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The table above displays the life expectancy at birth in 2030 
for five selected countries. ① In each of the five selected 
countries, it is predicted that the life expectancy of women will 
be higher than that of men. ② In the case of women, life 
expectancy in the Republic of Korea is expected to be the 
highest among the five countries, followed by that in Austria. 
③ As for men, the Republic of Korea and Singapore will rank 
the first and the second highest, respectively, in life 
expectancy in the five countries. ④ Both Slovakian women 
and men will have the lowest life expectancy by gender among 
the five countries, with 82.92 and 76.98 years, respectively. 
⑤ Among the five countries, the largest difference in life 
expectancy between women and men is 6.75 years, predicted 
to be found in the Republic of Korea, and the smallest 
difference is 3.46 years, in Sweden.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. Richard Burton에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Richard Burton was a highly regarded Welsh actor of stage 
and screen. He was born in 1925 in South Wales, the twelfth 
child of a poor miner. Burton was the first member of his 
family to go to secondary school. Then, he attended Oxford 
University and later joined the British air force during wartime. 
After leaving the military in 1947, he made his film debut in 
1949, in The Last Days of Dolwyn. Richard Burton went on to 
become a praised actor of stage and screen, who was 
nominated for an Academy Award seven times, but never won 
an Oscar. It is well-known that he had a powerful voice 
overwhelming the camera, the microphone, and all the 
intimacy of film acting. His final film was an adaptation of 
George Orwell’s famous novel, 1984. 
① South Wales에서 가난한 광부의 12번째 아이로 태어났다. 
② 전쟁 기간 중 영국 공군에 입대했다.
③ 인정받는 연기자가 되어, Oscar상을 7번 수상했다. 
④ 힘 있는 목소리를 가졌던 것으로 잘 알려져 있다. 
⑤ 마지막 영화는 George Orwell의 소설을 각색한 작품이었다. 
26. KSFF International Exchange Program에 관한 다음 안내문의 
내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
KSFF International Exchange Program
Are you interested in participating 
in an international exchange program? 
The Korea-Singapore Friendship 
Foundation (KSFF) will send high 
school students to 6 schools in Singapore. This opportunity 
will be great for developing a global perspective and 
lifelong memories.
OPPORTUNITY and DATES
∙Each school will host 7 to 10 high school students.
∙Two weeks: from September 3, 2018, to September 16, 2018
ACTIVITIES
∙Classroom participation and extra-curricular activities
∙Visiting tourist sites
ACCOMMODATIONS
∙KSFF will arrange for participants to stay with local 
families.
More information is available at www.ksffexchange.net. 
Please note: The application must be completed on our 
website by June 9, 2018. 
① 고등학생을 대상으로 한다. 
② 2018년 9월 16일부터 2주간 운영된다. 
③ 관광지 방문 활동을 포함한다. 
④ KSFF가 참가자를 위해 현지 가정 체류를 주선한다. 
⑤ 웹 사이트에서 신청을 완료해야 한다. 
27. 2018 Tree Distribution Event에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
일치하는 것은?
2018 Tree Distribution Event
The Greenville Community Center is 
pleased to offer free trees through our 
annual Tree Distribution Event. Distribution 
is limited to two trees per household due 
to the limited number of available trees. 
∙Call the community center at 304-315-7777 by Friday, 
June 15, 2018, to request your free trees. 
∙Requests are accepted by phone only. 
∙Pick-up instructions will be sent by the end of June 
2018 via text message.
∙The pick-up day for trees will be a Saturday, in either 
July or August 2018 (dependent on weather conditions). 
You can get more information about the age and size of 
the trees on our website (www.treegreenville.org).
① 할인된 가격으로 나무를 판매한다.
② 가구당 한 그루의 나무만 분양해 준다.
③ 이메일로만 신청을 받는다.
④ 나무를 받아가는 방법을 7월 말에 문자 메시지로 보낸다. 
⑤ 웹 사이트에서 나무의 나이 및 크기 정보를 제공한다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Humans are so averse to feeling that they’re being cheated 
① that they often respond in ways that seemingly make little 
sense. Behavioral economists ― the economists who actually 
study ② what people do as opposed to the kind who simply 
assume the human mind works like a calculator ― have 
shown again and again that people reject unfair offers even if 
③ it costs them money to do so. The typical experiment uses a 
task called the ultimatum game. It’s pretty straightforward. 
One person in a pair is given some money ― say $10. She 
then has the opportunity to offer some amount of it to her 
partner. The partner only has two options. He can take what’s 
offered or ④ refused to take anything. There’s no room for 
negotiation; that’s why it’s called the ultimatum game. What 
typically happens? Many people offer an equal split to the 
partner, ⑤ leaving both individuals happy and willing to trust 
each other in the future.
* averse to: ~을 싫어하는  ** ultimatum: 최후통첩
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. 다음 글에서 밑줄 친 None이 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 
것은? [3점]
Here’s an interesting thought. If glaciers started re-forming, 
they have a great deal more water now to draw on ― Hudson 
Bay, the Great Lakes, the hundreds of thousands of lakes of 
Canada, none of which existed to fuel the last ice sheet ― so 
they would grow very much quicker. And if they did start to 
advance again, what exactly would we do? Blast them with 
TNT or maybe nuclear missiles? Well, doubtless we would, 
but consider this. In 1964, the largest earthquake ever recorded 
in North America rocked Alaska with 200,000 megatons of 
concentrated might, the equivalent of 2,000 nuclear bombs. 
Almost 3,000 miles away in Texas, water sloshed out of 
swimming pools. A street in Anchorage fell twenty feet. The 
quake devastated 24,000 square miles of wilderness, much of 
it glaciated. And what effect did all this might have on 
Alaska’s glaciers? None.
* slosh: 철벅철벅 튀다  ** devastate: 황폐시키다
① It would be of no use to try to destroy glaciers.
② The melting glaciers would drive the rise of the sea level.
③ The Alaskan wilderness would not be harmed by glaciers.
④ Re-forming glaciers would not spread over North America.
⑤ The causes of glacier re-formation would not include quakes.
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
John was once in the office of a manager, Michael, when the 
phone rang. Immediately, Michael bellowed, “That disgusting 
phone never stops ringing.” ① He then proceeded to pick it up 
and engage in a fifteen-minute conversation while John 
waited. When ② he finally hung up, he looked exhausted and 
frustrated. He apologized as the phone rang once again. He 
later confessed that he was having a great deal of trouble 
completing his tasks because of the volume of calls he was 
responding to. At some point John asked him, “Have you ever 
considered having a certain period of time when ③ you 
simply don’t answer the phone?” Michael said, “As a matter of 
fact, no,” looking at ④ him with a puzzled look. It turned out 
that this simple suggestion helped Michael not only to relax, 
but to get more work done as well. Like many people, ⑤ he 
didn’t need hours of uninterrupted time, but he did need some! 
* bellow: 고함치다
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Although prices in most retail outlets are set by the retailer, 
this does not mean that these prices 
. 
On any particular day we find that all products have a specific 
price ticket on them. However, this price may be different from 
day to day or week to week. The price that the farmer gets from 
the wholesaler is much more flexible from day to day than the 
price that the retailer charges consumers. If, for example, bad 
weather leads to a poor potato crop, then the price that 
supermarkets have to pay to their wholesalers for potatoes will 
go up and this will be reflected in the prices they mark on 
potatoes in their stores. Thus, these prices do reflect the 
interaction of demand and supply in the wider marketplace for 
potatoes. Although they do not change in the supermarket from 
hour to hour to reflect local variations in demand and supply, 
they do change over time to reflect the underlying conditions 
of the overall production of and demand for the goods in 
question. [3점]
① reflect the principle of demand and supply
② may not change from hour to hour
③ go up due to bad weather
④ do not adjust to market forces over time
⑤ can be changed by the farmer’s active role
32. An individual characteristic that moderates the relationship 
with behavior is self-efficacy, or a judgment of one’s capability 
to accomplish a certain level of performance. People who have 
a high sense of self-efficacy tend to pursue challenging goals 
that may be outside the reach of the average person. People 
with a strong sense of self-efficacy, therefore, may be more 
willing to step outside the culturally prescribed behaviors to 
attempt tasks or goals for which success is viewed as improbable 
by the majority of social actors in a setting. For these individuals, 
. For 
example, Australians tend to endorse the “Tall Poppy Syndrome.” 
This saying suggests that any “poppy” that outgrows the others 
in a field will get “cut down;” in other words, any overachiever 
will eventually fail. Interviews and observations suggest that it 
is the high self-efficacy Australians who step outside this culturally 
prescribed behavior to actually achieve beyond average. [3점]
* self-efficacy: 자기 효능감  ** endorse: 지지하다 
① self-efficacy is not easy to define
② culture will have little or no impact on behavior 
③ setting a goal is important before starting a task 
④ high self-efficacy is a typical quality of Australians
⑤ judging the reaction from the community will be hard
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. Theorists of the novel commonly define the genre as a 
biographical form that came to prominence in the late eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries 
 
as a replacement for traditional sources of cultural authority. 
The novel, Georg Lukács argues, “seeks, by giving form, to 
uncover and construct the concealed totality of life” in the 
interiorized life story of its heroes. The typical plot of the novel 
is the protagonist’s quest for authority within, therefore, when 
that authority can no longer be discovered outside. By this 
accounting, there are no objective goals in novels, only the 
subjective goal of seeking the law that is necessarily created by 
the individual. The distinctions between crime and heroism, 
therefore, or between madness and wisdom, become purely 
subjective ones in a novel, judged by the quality or complexity 
of the individual’s consciousness. [3점]
① to establish the individual character
② to cast doubt on the identity of a criminal 
③ to highlight the complex structure of social consciousness
④ to make the objective distinction between crime and heroism
⑤ to develop the inner self of a hero into a collective wisdom
34. Rules can be thought of as formal types of game cues. 
They tell us the structure of the test, that is, what should be 
accomplished and how we should accomplish it. In this sense, 
. Only 
within the rules of the game of, say, basketball or baseball do 
the activities of jump shooting and fielding ground balls make 
sense and take on value. It is precisely the artificiality created 
by the rules, the distinctive problem to be solved, that gives 
sport its special meaning. That is why getting a basketball 
through a hoop while not using a ladder or pitching a baseball 
across home plate while standing a certain distance away 
becomes an important human project. It appears that respecting 
the rules not only preserves sport but also makes room for the 
creation of excellence and the emergence of meaning. Engaging 
in acts that would be considered inconsequential in ordinary 
life also liberates us a bit, making it possible to explore our 
capabilities in a protected environment. [3점]
* inconsequential: 중요하지 않은
① rules prevent sports from developing a special meaning
② rules create a problem that is artificial yet intelligible
③ game structures can apply to other areas
④ sports become similar to real life due to rules
⑤ game cues are provided by player and spectator interaction
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
While being an introvert comes with its challenges, it 
definitely has its advantages as well. For example, an introvert 
is far less likely to make a mistake in a social situation, such 
as inadvertently insulting another person whose opinion is not 
agreeable. ① An introvert would enjoy reflecting on their 
thoughts, and thus would be far less likely to suffer from 
boredom without outside stimulation. ② The only risk that 
you will face as an introvert is that people who do not know 
you may think that you are aloof or that you think you are 
better than them. ③ If you learn how to open up just a little bit 
with your opinions and thoughts, you will be able to thrive in 
both worlds. ④ An introvert may prefer online to in-person 
communication, as you do when feeling temporarily uncertain 
with your relationships. ⑤ You can then stay true to your 
personality without appearing to be antisocial.
* inadvertently: 무심코  ** aloof: 냉담한
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.  
A carbon sink is a natural feature that absorbs or stores 
more carbon than it releases. 
(A) Carbon sinks have been able to absorb about half of this 
excess CO2, and the world’s oceans have done the major 
part of that job. They absorb about one-fourth of humans’ 
industrial carbon emissions, doing half the work of all 
Earth’s carbon sinks combined.
(B) Its mass of plants and other organic material absorb and 
store tons of carbon. However, the planet’s major carbon 
sink is its oceans. Since the Industrial Revolution began 
in the eighteenth century, CO2 released during industrial 
processes has greatly increased the proportion of carbon 
in the atmosphere. 
(C) The value of carbon sinks is that they can help create 
equilibrium in the atmosphere by removing excess CO2. 
One example of a carbon sink is a large forest. 
* equilibrium: 평형 상태
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
Promoting attractive images of one’s country is not new, 
but the conditions for trying to create soft power have 
changed dramatically in recent years. For one thing, nearly 
half the countries in the world are now democracies. 
(A) Technological advances have led to a dramatic reduction 
in the cost of processing and transmitting information. 
The result is an explosion of information, and that has 
produced a “paradox of plenty.” Plentiful information 
leads to scarcity of attention.
(B) In such circumstances, diplomacy aimed at public opinion 
can become as important to outcomes as traditional classified 
diplomatic communications among leaders. Information 
creates power, and today a much larger part of the world’s 
population has access to that power. 
(C) When people are overwhelmed with the volume of 
information confronting them, they have difficulty knowing 
what to focus on. Attention, rather than information, becomes 
the scarce resource, and those who can distinguish valuable 
information from background clutter gain power. [3점]
* clutter: 혼란
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
There is a considerable difference as to whether people 
watch a film about the Himalayas on television and become 
excited by the ‘untouched nature’ of the majestic mountain 
peaks, or whether they get up and go on a trek to Nepal.
Tourism takes place simultaneously in the realm of the 
imagination and that of the physical world. In contrast to 
literature or film, it leads to ‘real’, tangible worlds, while 
nevertheless remaining tied to the sphere of fantasies, dreams, 
wishes ― and myth. It thereby allows the ritual enactment of 
mythological ideas. ( ① ) Even in the latter case, they 
remain, at least partly, in an imaginary world. ( ② ) They 
experience moments that they have already seen at home in 
books, brochures and films. ( ③ ) Their notions of untouched 
nature and friendly, innocent indigenous people will probably 
be confirmed. ( ④ ) But now this confirmation is anchored 
in a physical experience. ( ⑤ ) The myth is thus transmitted 
in a much more powerful way than by television, movies or 
books.
* indigenous: 토착의
39.
There are also clinical cases that show the flip side of this 
coin. 
Humans can tell lies with their faces. Although some are 
specifically trained to detect lies from facial expressions, the 
average person is often misled into believing false and 
manipulated facial emotions. One reason for this is that we are 
“two-faced.” By this I mean that we have two different neural 
systems that manipulate our facial muscles. ( ① ) One neural 
system is under voluntary control and the other works under 
involuntary control. ( ② ) There are reported cases of 
individuals who have damaged the neural system that controls 
voluntary expressions. ( ③ ) They still have facial expressions, 
but are incapable of producing deceitful ones. ( ④ ) The 
emotion that you see is the emotion they are feeling, since they 
have lost the needed voluntary control to produce false facial 
expressions. ( ⑤ ) These people have injured the system that 
controls their involuntary expressions, so that the only changes 
in their demeanor you will see are actually willed expressions.
* demeanor: 태도, 표정
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), 
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? 
In some subject areas, topics build on one another in a 
hierarchical fashion, so that a learner must almost certainly 
master one topic before moving to the next. For example, 
an elementary school student should probably master 
principles of addition before moving to multiplication, 
because multiplication is an extension of addition. Similarly, 
a medical student must have expertise in human anatomy 
before studying surgical techniques: It’s difficult to perform 
an appendectomy if you can’t find the appendix. Vertical 
transfer refers to such situations: A learner acquires new 
knowledge or skills by building on more basic information 
and procedures. In other cases, knowledge of one topic 
may affect learning a second topic even though the first 
isn’t a necessary condition for the second. Knowledge of 
French isn’t essential for learning Spanish, yet knowing 
French can help with Spanish because many words are 
similar in the two languages. When knowledge of the first 
topic is helpful but not essential to learning the second 
one, lateral transfer is occurring.
* appendectomy: 맹장 수술
󰀻
In vertical transfer, lower level knowledge is 
(A)
 
before one proceeds to a higher level; however, in the case 
of lateral transfer, 
(B)
 knowledge can be helpful, 
but it is not required. 
(A)
(B)
① essential …… prior
② practical …… detailed
③ useless
…… relevant 
④ practical …… independent
⑤ essential …… unbiased
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
By the turn of the twentieth century, the permanent repertoire 
of musical classics dominated almost every field of concert 
music, from piano, song, or chamber music recitals to operas 
and orchestral concerts. The (a) change from a century before 
was enormous. In the eighteenth century, performers and 
listeners demanded new music all the time, and “ancient music” 
included anything written more than twenty years earlier. But 
musicians and audiences in the early 1900s (b) expected that 
most concert music they performed or heard would be at least 
a generation old, and they judged new music by the standards 
of the classics already enshrined in the repertoire. In essence, 
concert halls and opera houses had become museums for 
displaying the musical artworks of the past two hundred years. 
The repertoire varied according to the performing medium 
and from region to region, but the core was largely the (c) same 
throughout most of Europe and the Americas, including operas 
and operatic excerpts from Mozart through Verdi, Wagner, and 
Bizet; orchestral and chamber music from Haydn through the 
late Romantics; and keyboard music by J. S. Bach, Haydn, 
Mozart, Beethoven, and prominent nineteenth-century composers.
Living composers increasingly found themselves in competition 
with the music of the past. This is the great theme of modern 
music in the classical tradition, especially in the first half of the 
century: in competing with past composers for the attention of 
performers and listeners who (d) disregarded the classical 
masterworks, living composers sought to secure a place for 
themselves by offering something new and distinctive while 
continuing the tradition. They combined individuality and 
innovation with emulation of the past, seeking to write music 
that would be considered original and worthy of performance 
alongside the masterworks of (e) earlier times. 
* enshrine: 소중히 하다  ** excerpt: 발췌곡  *** emulation: 경쟁, 모방
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? 
① Increasing the Gap Between Composers and Listeners
② Within or Beyond Classical Music Heritage
③ Classical Music: Healing the World
④ Lost in the Past: The End of Masterpieces
⑤ Classical Composition in the Nineteenth Century
42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 
것은? [3점]
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 
(A)
Princess, a solid Boxer, had been given to Rita when she 
was ten weeks old, and Rita immediately bonded with (a) her, 
petting her, feeding her, teaching her basic commands, and 
letting her sleep on Rita’s bed. The two were always together 
and within arm’s reach. The only time they were apart was 
when Rita was learning to swim. Princess had a fear of water 
that was so extreme that she couldn’t even touch the water. 
* Boxer: 복서(개의 한 품종)
(B)
Upon hearing Rita’s cry, her mother rushed to the railing, 
shouting for help, from the entrance of the store a hundred 
feet or so away. Princess was looking at the water and trembling 
in fear. (b) She stood there staring at the water ― the one 
thing that had nearly taken her life. Her love for Rita 
overpowered her fear and she leapt out through the same 
open space in the railing and plunged into the water. Once in 
the water, Princess quickly found Rita and slowly dragged 
her to the shore to her grateful mother.
(C)
Princess’ fears stemmed from her puppyhood when (c) she 
almost drowned twice. These early traumas made water the 
only thing that Princess truly feared. When (d) she came 
close to a body of water, she would try to pull back and 
seemed emotionally distressed. Would she ever be able to 
overcome this fear? She had a chance one late afternoon 
when Rita’s mother took them to a shopping mall.
(D)
It was located along the edge of a lake and featured a 
wooden boardwalk which was built along the shore. While 
her mother headed to a store, Rita and Princess began to play 
on the boardwalk. Suddenly, a boy riding a bicycle slipped on 
the damp wooden surface, hitting Rita at an angle, which 
propelled her through an open section of the guard rail. (e) She 
let out a scream of pain and fear as she fell into the water. She 
then continued to cry for help and struggle to get out. 
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)
② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Rita는 수영을 배울 때를 제외하고 Princess와 항상 함께했다.
② Princess가 사고를 당하자 Rita의 어머니는 도움을 요청했다.
③ Princess는 Rita에 대한 사랑으로 물에 대한 두려움을 극복했다.
④ Rita의 어머니는 Rita와 Princess를 쇼핑몰에 데려갔다.
⑤ Rita와 Princess는 호숫가 산책로에서 놀고 있었다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
