1
8
  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Yes. That would be great.
② Sure. We had a great time.
③ Right. I already got a job.
④ Never. They haven’t seen it.
⑤ No. There’s no writing class.
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I agree. But I don’t have the time for it.
② You’re right. Then I’ll never tell anyone.
③ Trust me. You’ll realize you did the right thing.
④ I understand. But let us know if it happens again.
⑤ That’s true. We’ve been practicing for a long time.
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
① 농장 체험 프로그램을 홍보하려고
② 유산소 운동의 장점을 소개하려고
③ 가족 여행 준비물을 안내하려고
④ 유제품 보관 방법을 설명하려고
⑤ 저지방 식단의 중요성을 강조하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 효과적인 독서를 위해서 집중력을 길러야 한다.
② 학습자의 수준에 맞는 영어 도서를 선택해야 한다.
③ 도전 욕구를 불러일으키는 과제는 학습 동기를 높인다.
④ 학습자의 흥미를 고려한 영어 읽기 자료를 개발해야 한다.
⑤ 사전을 활용한 어휘 학습은 영어 읽기 능력 향상에 도움이 된다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 사회자 － 마술사
② 조련사 － 관람객
③ 무대감독 － 가수
④ 운전기사 － 정비사
⑤ 은행원 － 고객
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 공연 연습 도와주기
② 생일 케이크 만들기
③ 카메라 가방 구매하기
④ 여분의 메모리 카드 찾기
⑤ 아이의 무대의상 가져오기
8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 하이킹을 할 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 휴대전화를 수리해야 해서
② 할머니를 찾아뵈어야 해서
③ 회사 회의에 참석해야 해서
④ 신상품 광고를 준비해야 해서
⑤ 친구들과 영화를 보러 가야 해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $36
② $40
③ $45
④ $47
⑤ $50
10. 대화를 듣고, World Furniture Expo에 관해 언급되지 않은 
것을 고르시오.
① 개최 기간
② 개최 장소
③ 참여 업체 수
④ 특별 강좌
⑤ 입장료
11. Creative Minds Science Club에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 
일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 1학년과 2학년 학생이 가입할 수 있다.
② 매주 화요일 방과 후에 모인다.
③ 작년에 다수의 발명 대회에서 수상하였다.
④ 올해의 지도 교사는 물리 선생님이다.
⑤ 더 많은 정보를 학교 게시판에서 찾을 수 있다.
2017학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
1
제 3 교시
홀수형
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
홀수형
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구매할 램프를 고르시오.
①
②
③
④
⑤
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Probably not. You’d better see a doctor.
② It’s my fault. I should’ve told you earlier.
③ That’s too bad. We waited for you today.
④ No problem. I can explain how to get there.
⑤ That’s right. We met in the library yesterday.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① That’s a good idea. I’ll get rid of it right away.
② I think it’s closed. Turn in the book tomorrow.
③ I hope you’re right. I’ll check with them.
④ It’s too late. The tickets are all sold out.
⑤ Here’s the wallet. Take it to the station.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Brian이 Sarah에게 할 말로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Brian:
① You can take a singing class at the local community center.
② Try to keep a close relationship with your classmates.
③ Would you give me some advice as a mentor?
④ You need to get help with your recommendation letter.
⑤ How about volunteering as a mentor at the community center?
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① several ways flowers attract animals
② popular professions related to animals
③ various animals that feed from flowers
④ major factors that pose a threat to animals
⑤ endangered animals living on tropical islands
17. 언급된 동물이 아닌 것은?
① hummingbirds
② bats
③ lizards
④ parrots
⑤ squirrels
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 한국의 대학 생활과 관련한 유의 사항을 알리려고
② 한국어 글쓰기 강좌의 변경된 등록 절차를 공지하려고
③ 한국어 글쓰기 지도를 받을 외국인 학생을 모집하려고
④ 외국인 학생을 위한 글쓰기 센터 설립을 건의하려고
⑤ 한국어 글쓰기 지도 강사의 자격 요건을 안내하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Breaden의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
All smiling, Breaden, a cute three-year-old boy, was walking 
along the aisle of snacks, bars, and sweets. It was the aisle of 
all kinds of temptation for him. “Wow!” he exclaimed. Right in 
front of his eyes were rows of delicious-looking chocolate bars 
waiting to be touched. His mom was holding his hand. 
Breaden, her only child, had always been the focus of her 
attention and she was cautious not to lose him in the market. 
Suddenly, she stopped to say hello to her friends. Breaden 
stopped, too. With his eyes wide open and his mouth watering, 
Breaden stretched out his arm and was about to grab a bar 
when he felt a tight grip on his hand. He looked up. “Breaden, 
not today!” He knew what that meant. “Okay, Mommy,” he 
sighed. His shoulders fell.
① excited
→ disappointed
② embarrassed → satisfied
③ lonely
→ pleased
④ annoyed
→ relieved
⑤ delighted → jealous
20. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Many present efforts to guard and maintain human 
progress, to meet human needs, and to realize human 
ambitions are simply unsustainable ─ in both the rich and 
poor nations. They draw too heavily, too quickly, on already 
overdrawn environmental resource accounts to be affordable 
far into the future without bankrupting those accounts. They 
may show profit on the balance sheets of our generation, but 
our children will inherit the losses. We borrow environmental 
capital from future generations with no intention or prospect 
of repaying. They may blame us for our wasteful ways, but 
they can never collect on our debt to them. We act as we do 
because we can get away with it: future generations do not 
vote; they have no political or financial power; they cannot 
challenge our decisions.
① 환경 문제를 해결하기 위한 세대 간 협력이 중요하다.
② 인류의 발전은 다양한 환경 자원의 개발에 달려 있다.
③ 미래의 환경 문제에 대비한 국제 사회의 공조가 필요하다.
④ 선진국들은 경제력을 기반으로 환경 자원을 선점하고 있다.
⑤ 현세대는 미래 세대에 대한 고려 없이 환경 자원을 남용하고 있다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
Want to improve your Korean writing? Writing is an 
essential tool that will help you adjust to Korean 
university life. The Ha-Rang Writing Center offers a 
free tutoring program open to all international students 
at our university. We encourage you to take advantage 
of this. The program has always been very popular 
among international students. Registration opens from 
November 28 for three days only. Once you are 
registered, we will match you with a perfect tutor and 
contact you to arrange your schedule. We are sure that 
you will be satisfied with our well-experienced tutors. 
Don’t miss this great opportunity to improve your 
Korean writing. For more information, feel free to email 
Jiyung Yoon, HRWC Director, at jyoon@hrwc.org.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형
3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
The precision of the lines on the map, the consistency with 
which symbols are used, the grid and/or projection system, the 
apparent certainty with which place names are written and 
placed, and the legend and scale information all give the map 
an aura of scientific accuracy and objectivity. Although 
subjective interpretation goes into the construction of these 
cartographic elements, the finished map appears to express an 
authoritative truth about the world, separate from any interests 
and influences. The very trust that this apparent objectivity 
inspires is what makes maps such powerful carriers of ideology. 
However unnoticeably, maps do indeed reflect the world views 
of either their makers or, more probably, the supporters of their 
makers, in addition to the political and social conditions under 
which they were made. Some of the simple ideological 
messages that maps can convey include: This land is and has 
long been ours; here is the center of the universe; if we do not 
claim this land, the enemies you most fear will.
* aura: 기운, 분위기  ** cartographic: 지도 제작(법)의
① the authority derived from trustworthy maps
② political and social conflicts caused by maps
③ ideologies lying beneath the objectivity of maps
④ the conditions essential to making a map accurate
⑤ subjectivity defining the creativity of map-making
[22～23] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
22. As a system for transmitting specific factual information 
without any distortion or ambiguity, the sign system of 
honey-bees would probably win easily over human language 
every time. However, language offers something more 
valuable than mere information exchange. Because the 
meanings of words are not invariable and because 
understanding always involves interpretation, the act of 
communicating is always a joint, creative effort. Words can 
carry meanings beyond those consciously intended by 
speakers or writers because listeners or readers bring their own 
perspectives to the language they encounter. Ideas expressed 
imprecisely may be more intellectually stimulating for 
listeners or readers than simple facts. The fact that language is 
not always reliable for causing precise meanings to be generated 
in someone else’s mind is a reflection of its powerful strength 
as a medium for creating new understanding. It is the inherent 
ambiguity and adaptability of language as a meaning-making 
system that makes the relationship between language and 
thinking so special.
* distortion: 왜곡, 곡해
① Erase Ambiguity in Language Production!
② Not Creative but Simple: The Way Language Works
③ Communication as a Universal Goal in Language Use
④ What in Language Creates Varied Understanding?
⑤ Language: A Crystal-Clear Looking Glass
23. The film director, as compared to the theater director, has 
as his material, the finished, recorded celluloid. This material 
from which his final work is composed consists not of living 
men or real landscapes, not of real, actual stage-sets, but only 
of their images, recorded on separate strips that can be 
shortened, altered, and assembled according to his will. The 
elements of reality are fixed on these pieces; by combining 
them in his selected sequence, shortening and lengthening 
them according to his desire, the director builds up his own 
“filmic” time and “filmic” space. He does not adapt reality, 
but uses it for the creation of a new reality, and the most 
characteristic and important aspect of this process is that, in it, 
laws of space and time invariable and inescapable in work 
with actuality become obedient. The film assembles from 
them a new reality proper only to itself.
① A Reality in the Film Director’s Hands
② The Director’s Reality Never Changes
③ Innovative Technology in Film Editing
④ A Filmic World: Lost in Time and Space
⑤ Film Making: Exploration into the Unknown
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The two pie charts above show how much of the 
information found using search engines is considered to be 
accurate or trustworthy by two groups of respondents (AP & 
NWP teachers and U.S. adult search users) in 2012. ① As for 
AP & NWP teachers, five percent say that “All / Almost all” 
of the information found using search engines is accurate or 
trustworthy, while 28 percent of U.S. adult search users say 
the same. ② The largest percentage of both AP & NWP 
teachers and U.S. adult search users answer that “Most” of 
the information is accurate or trustworthy. ③ In addition, 40 
percent of AP & NWP teachers say that “Some” of the 
information is accurate or trustworthy, and more than 30 
percent of U.S. adult search users respond the same. ④ U.S. 
adult search users saying that “Very little / None” of the 
information found using search engines is accurate or 
trustworthy account for less than five percent. ⑤ The 
percentage of U.S. adult search users who answer “Don’t 
know” is only one percent.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
홀수형
4
8
25. Miloš Forman에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Even though he won many Academy Awards, Miloš 
Forman was not a U.S. born filmmaker. Forman grew up in a 
small town near Prague. Orphaned when his parents died 
during World War II, he was raised by his relatives. In the 
1950s, Forman studied film at the film school of the 
University of Prague. Throughout the late 1950s and early 
1960s, Forman acted as either writer or assistant director on 
several films. Later, he emigrated to the U.S. and continued to 
make films. In 1975, he directed One Flew over the Cuckoo’s 
Nest, which became only the second film in history to win 
Oscars in all the five major categories. Afterward, the movie 
Amadeus, a celebration of the genius of Mozart, which he 
also directed, swept eight Oscars including one for best 
director. With Jan Novák, Forman wrote his autobiography, 
Turnaround: A Memoir, which was published in 1994.
① Prague 근교의 작은 마을에서 성장했다.
② Prague 대학교에서 영화를 공부했다.
③ 미국으로 이주한 후에도 계속 영화를 만들었다.
④ 영화 Amadeus로 오스카 최고 감독상을 수상했다.
⑤ Turnaround: A Memoir를 단독으로 집필했다.
26. Fremont Art College’s 7th Annual Art Exhibition에 관한 
다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 개장 시간은 주중과 주말이 다르다.
② 학생들이 출품한 사진이 전시될 예정이다.
③ 모든 전시품은 판매되지 않는다.
④ 전시회장 내에서 사진 촬영이 허용된다.
⑤ 카페테리아에서 간식이 무료로 제공될 것이다.
27. Fall Festival at Forest Botanic Gardens에 관한 다음 안내문의 
내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 아침 산책은 비가 내려도 진행된다.
② 연날리기와 모래성 쌓기는 무료이다.
③ 잔디밭에 앉는 것이 허용된다.
④ 헤드폰 없이 오디오 장치를 사용할 수 있다.
⑤ 주차 요금은 무료이다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
When people face real adversity ─ disease, unemployment, 
or the disabilities of age ─ affection from a pet takes on new 
meaning. A pet’s continuing affection becomes crucially 
important for ① those enduring hardship because it reassures 
them that their core essence has not been damaged. Thus pets 
are important in the treatment of ② depressed or chronically ill 
patients. In addition, pets are ③ used  to great advantage with 
the institutionalized aged. In such institutions it is difficult for 
the staff to retain optimism when all the patients are declining 
in health. Children who visit cannot help but remember 
④ what their parents or grandparents once were and be 
depressed by their incapacities. Animals, however, have no 
expectations about mental capacity. They do not worship 
youth. They have no memories about what the aged once 
⑤ was and greet them as if they were children. An old man 
holding a puppy can relive a childhood moment with complete 
accuracy. His joy and the animal’s response are the same.
Fremont Art Collegeʼs 7th Annual
ART EXHIBITION
November 21－27
3rd Floor Gallery in the Student Union
Hours: 10:00 a.m.－5:00 p.m. (Monday － Friday)
11:00 a.m.－3:00 p.m. (Saturday & Sunday)
∙Fremont Art College will be hosting its 7th Annual 
Art Exhibition for one week.
∙Paintings, ceramic works, and photographs submitted 
by students will be exhibited. All exhibits are for sale, 
and all money raised will be donated to charity.
∙The exhibition is free to all. 
∙Taking photos is allowed inside the exhibition hall.
∙Free snacks will be available at the cafeteria.
For more information, please visit our website at 
www.fremontart.edu.
Fall Festival at Forest Botanic Gardens
October 1－October 31
◈ Morning Walk
   － The number of participants is limited to 20.
   － The walk will be cancelled in the event of rain.
◈ Fun Activities
   － Enjoy exciting activities such as kite flying and 
sandcastle building for free.
   － Spend a day or two camping.
◈ Tips for Your Visit
   － Sitting on lawns is not permitted.
   － Audio devices may only be used with headphones.
◈ Parking
   － The parking lot is open from 8 a.m. to 9 p.m. every 
day.
   － The parking fee is $10 a day.
◈ For more information, visit www.fffbg.com.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형
5
5
8
29. (A), (B), (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 
적절한 것은?
When teachers work in isolation, they tend to see the world 
through one set of eyes ─ their own. The fact that there might 
be someone somewhere in the same building or district who 
may be more successful at teaching this or that subject or 
lesson is (A) based / lost on teachers who close the door and 
work their way through the school calendar virtually alone. In 
the absence of a process that (B) allows / forbids them to 
benchmark those who do things better or at least differently, 
teachers are left with that one perspective ─ their own. I 
taught various subjects under the social studies umbrella and 
had very little idea of how my peers who taught the same 
subject did what they did. The idea of meeting regularly to 
compare notes, plan common assessments, and share what we 
did well (C) mostly / never occurred to us. Rather, we spent 
much time in the social studies office complaining about a 
lack of time and playing the blame game.
(A)
(B)
(C)
① based …… allows …… never
② based …… forbids …… mostly
③ lost
…… allows …… mostly
④ lost
…… allows …… never
⑤ lost
…… forbids …… never
30. 밑줄 친 he[his]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Dr. Paul Odland and his friend Bob travel frequently to 
South America, where they provide free medical treatment for 
disabled children of poor families. One day, they went to a 
local marketplace. Paul wanted to buy some souvenirs, and 
① he spotted a carving that he liked. The non-English 
speaking seller was asking 500 pesos for the carving. With Bob 
acting as interpreter, Paul offered 300 and ② his opponent 
proposed 450. The bargaining in the noisy market became 
spirited, even intense, with Paul stepping up ③ his price 
slightly and the seller going down slowly. The pace increased 
so fast that Bob could not keep up with the back-and-forth 
interpretation. Meanwhile, observing the seller carefully, Paul 
sensed something wrong in Bob’s interpretation. In fact, the 
seller had gone below Paul’s last offer. When Paul raised his 
doubt, Bob instantly recognized the error and corrected ④ his 
interpretation. At length, they settled the deal, and ⑤ he was 
delighted to purchase the carving at a reasonable price and 
thanked Bob.
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. The creativity that children possess needs to be cultivated 
throughout their development. Research suggests that 
overstructuring the child’s environment may actually limit 
creative and academic development. This is a central problem 
with much of science instruction. The exercises or activities 
are devised to eliminate different options and to focus on 
predetermined results. The answers are structured to fit the 
course assessments, and the wonder of science is lost along 
with cognitive intrigue. We define cognitive intrigue as the 
wonder that stimulates and intrinsically motivates an 
individual to voluntarily engage in an activity. The loss of 
cognitive intrigue may be initiated by the sole use of play 
items with predetermined conclusions and reinforced by rote 
instruction in school. This is exemplified by toys, games, and 
lessons that are a(n) 
 in and of themselves and 
require little of the individual other than to master the planned 
objective. [3점]
* rote: 기계적인 암기
① end
② input
③ puzzle
④ interest
⑤ alternative
32. Temporal resolution is particularly interesting in the 
context of satellite remote sensing. The temporal density of 
remotely sensed imagery is large, impressive, and growing. 
Satellites are collecting a great deal of imagery as you read 
this sentence. However, most applications in geography and 
environmental studies do not require extremely fine-grained 
temporal resolution. Meteorologists may require visible, 
infrared, and radar information at sub-hourly temporal 
resolution; urban planners might require imagery at monthly 
or annual resolution; and transportation planners may not 
need any time series information at all for some applications. 
Again, the temporal resolution of imagery used should 
. Sometimes 
researchers have to search archives of aerial photographs to 
get information from that past that pre-date the collection of 
satellite imagery. [3점]
* meteorologist: 기상학자  ** infrared: 적외선의
① be selected for general purposes 
② meet the requirements of your inquiry
③ be as high as possible for any occasion
④ be applied to new technology by experts
⑤ rely exclusively upon satellite information
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
홀수형
6
8
33. Grief is unpleasant. Would one not then be better off 
without it altogether? Why accept it even when the loss is 
real? Perhaps we should say of it what Spinoza said of regret: 
that whoever feels it is “twice unhappy or twice helpless.” 
Laurence Thomas has suggested that the utility of “negative 
sentiments” (emotions like grief, guilt, resentment, and anger, 
which there is seemingly a reason to believe we might be 
better off without) lies in their providing a kind of guarantee 
of authenticity for such dispositional sentiments as love 
and respect. No occurrent feelings of love and respect need 
to be present throughout the period in which it is true that 
one loves or respects. One might therefore sometimes 
suspect, in the absence of the positive occurrent feelings, that 
. At such times, 
negative emotions like grief offer a kind of testimonial to the 
authenticity of love or respect. [3점]
* dispositional: 성향적인  ** testimonial: 증거
① one no longer loves
② one is much happier
③ an emotional loss can never be real
④ respect for oneself can be guaranteed
⑤ negative sentiments do not hold any longer
34. Over a period of time the buildings which housed social, 
legal, religious, and other rituals evolved into forms that we 
subsequently have come 
. 
This is a two-way process; the building provides the physical 
environment and setting for a particular social ritual such as 
traveling by train or going to the theater, as well as the 
symbolic setting. The meaning of buildings evolves and 
becomes established by experience and we in turn read our 
experience into buildings. Buildings arouse an empathetic 
reaction in us through these projected experiences, and the 
strength of these reactions is determined by our culture, our 
beliefs, and our expectations. They tell stories, for their form 
and spatial organization give us hints about how they should be 
used. Their physical layout encourages some uses and inhibits 
others; we do not go backstage in a theater unless especially 
invited. Inside a law court the precise location of those 
involved in the legal process is an integral part of the design 
and an essential part of ensuring that the law is upheld. [3점]
* empathetic: 공감할 수 있는
① to identify and relate to a new architectural trend
② to recognize and associate with those buildings’ function
③ to define and refine by reflecting cross-cultural interactions
④ to use and change into an integral part of our environment
⑤ to alter and develop for the elimination of their meanings
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Most often, you will find or meet people who introduce 
themselves in terms of their work or by what they spend time 
on. These people introduce themselves as a salesman or an 
executive. ① There is nothing criminal in doing this, but 
psychologically, we become what we believe. ② Identifying 
what we can do in the workplace serves to enhance the quality 
of our professional career. ③ People who follow this practice 
tend to lose their individuality and begin to live with the notion 
that they are recognized by the job they do. ④ However, jobs 
may not be permanent, and you may lose your job for 
countless reasons, some of which you may not even be 
responsible for. ⑤ In such a case, these people suffer from an 
inevitable social and mental trauma, leading to emotional 
stress and a feeling that all of a sudden they have been 
disassociated from what once was their identity.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
Interestingly, being observed has two quite distinct 
effects on performance. In some cases, performance is 
decreased, even to the point of non-existence. The 
extreme of this is stage fright, the sudden fear of public 
performance.
(A) So, if you are learning to play a new sport, it is better to 
begin it alone, but when you become skilled at it, then 
you will probably perform better with an audience.
(B) There are many instances of well-known actors who, in 
mid-career, develop stage fright and simply cannot 
perform. The other extreme is that being observed 
enhances performance, people doing whatever it might 
be better when they know that others are watching.
(C) The general rule seems to be that if one is doing 
something new or for the first time, then being observed 
while doing it decreases performance. On the other hand, 
being observed while doing some task or engaging in 
some activity that is well known or well practiced tends 
to enhance performance.
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형
7
7
8
37.
Evolution works to maximize the number of descendants 
that an animal leaves behind. Where the risk of death from 
fishing increases as an animal grows, evolution favors 
those that grow slowly, mature younger and smaller, and 
reproduce earlier.
(A) Surely these adaptations are good news for species 
hard-pressed by excessive fishing? Not exactly. Young 
fish produce many fewer eggs than large-bodied animals, 
and many industrial fisheries are now so intensive that 
few animals survive more than a couple of years beyond 
the age of maturity.
(B) This is exactly what we now see in the wild. Cod in 
Canada’s Gulf of St. Lawrence begin to reproduce at 
around four today; forty years ago they had to wait until 
six or seven to reach maturity. Sole in the North Sea 
mature at half the body weight they did in 1950.
(C) Together this means there are fewer eggs and larvae to 
secure future generations. In some cases the amount of 
young produced today is a hundred or even a thousand 
times less than in the past, putting the survival of species, 
and the fisheries dependent on them, at grave risk. [3점]
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
Most readers of reports and papers are reading the 
documents because they are interested in, and know 
something about, the subject.
What is the best order for a report, paper or other technical 
document? Of course, it must be logical; but that means 
simply that the paper must have connection and sequence, 
and a variety of orders is possible under this heading. Too 
many writers interpret the term logical to mean chronological, 
and it has become habitual to begin reports and papers with 
careful reviews of previous work. ( ① ) Usually, this is 
tactically weak. ( ② ) Therefore, to rehearse to them the 
findings of previous work is simply to bore them with 
unnecessary reminders. ( ③ ) The interesting thing for them 
is the new information ─ the new findings and conclusions. 
( ④ ) So it is usually best to start with those pieces of 
information. ( ⑤ ) To give a long chronological account of 
work or procedures is normally appropriate only when the 
essential point of the paper is the chronological sequence.
* chronological: 연대순의
39.
Rather, they will happen only through state intervention, 
based on parliamentary decision.
I expect that global society will increase annual investments 
from 24% today to 36% of the GDP in 2052. Much of this 
investment will be in energy-efficient goods that are more 
expensive than old-fashioned stuff designed for an era of 
cheap energy. ( ① ) Another share will be invested in the shift 
from coal to more expensive fuels, like conventional gas. ( ② )
Some will go into the construction of new renewable energy 
supply, even during the years before it becomes competitive. 
( ③ ) And a lot will go into repair of climate damage or 
adaptation to future climate damage ─ for example, investing 
in new protective walls along the coast to keep the rising 
ocean back. ( ④ ) These huge increases in investment would 
not come about if investment was left to the market. ( ⑤ ) It 
will be either direct, when the government invests the tax 
dollars in whatever capacity it considers to be most necessary, 
or indirect, when the government passes legislation that makes 
the desired activity more profitable.
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), 
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The impacts of tourism on the environment are evident 
to scientists, but not all residents attribute environmental 
damage to tourism. Residents commonly have positive 
views on the economic and some sociocultural influences 
of tourism on quality of life, but their reactions to 
environmental impacts are mixed. Some residents feel 
tourism provides more parks and recreation areas, 
improves the quality of the roads and public facilities, and 
does not contribute to ecological decline. Many do not 
blame tourism for traffic problems, overcrowded outdoor 
recreation, or the disturbance of peace and tranquility of 
parks. Alternatively, some residents express concern that 
tourists overcrowd the local fishing, hunting, and other 
recreation areas or may cause traffic and pedestrian 
congestion. Some studies suggest that variations in 
residents’ feelings about tourism’s relationship to 
environmental damage are related to the type of tourism, 
the extent to which residents feel the natural environment 
needs to be protected, and the distance residents live from 
the tourist attractions.
* tranquility: 고요함  ** congestion: 혼잡
󰀻
Residents do not 
(A)
 tourism’s environmental 
influences identically since they take 
(B)
 postures 
based on factors such as the type of tourism, opinions on 
the degree of protection, and their distance from an attraction.
(A)
(B)
(A)
(B)
① weigh
…… dissimilar
② weigh
…… common
③ weigh
…… balanced
④ control …… favorable
⑤ control …… conflicting
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
홀수형
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Duration refers to the time that events last. If we think of 
tempo as the speed of events, then duration is the speed of 
the clock itself. For the physicist, the duration of a “second” 
is precise and unambiguous: it is equal to 9,192,631,770 
cycles of the frequency associated with the transition 
between two energy levels of the isotope cesium-133. In the 
realm of psychological experience, however, quantifying 
units of time is a considerably clumsier operation. When 
people are removed from the cues of “real” time ─ be it the 
sun, bodily fatigue, or timepieces themselves ─ it doesn’t 
take long before their time sense breaks down. And it is this 
usually 
(A)
 psychological clock, as opposed to the 
time on one’s watch, that creates the perception of duration 
that people experience. 
Theoretically, a person who mentally stretches the duration 
of time should experience a slower tempo. Imagine, for 
example, that baseballs are pitched to two different batters. 
The balls are thrown every 5 seconds for 50 seconds, so a 
total of 10 balls are thrown. We now ask both batters how 
much time has passed. Let’s say that batter number one (who 
loves hitting) feels the duration to be 40 seconds. Batter 
number two (bored by baseball) believes it to be 60 seconds. 
Psychologically, then, the first person has experienced 
baseballs approaching every four seconds while the second 
sees it as every six seconds. The perceived tempo, in other 
words, is 
(B)
 for batter number one.
* isotope: 동위원소  ** clumsy: 서투른
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① What Timepieces Bring to Our Lives
② Research into Time: Precision vs. Duration
③ Flight from Time: A New Direction for Physics
④ The Peaceful Coexistence of Science and Baseball
⑤ How Long, How Fast: A Matter of Time Perception
42. 윗글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
(A)
(B)
(A)
(B)
① delayed
…… faster
② internal
…… slower
③ accurate
…… slower
④ imprecise …… faster
⑤ mysterious …… slower
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
A seventeen-year-old German boy named Erik Brandes 
stepped out onto the empty vast stage of the Cologne Opera 
House. It was the most exciting day of Erik’s life. (a) The 
youngest concert promoter in Germany had persuaded the 
Opera House to host a late-night concert of improvised jazz 
by the American pianist Keith Jarrett. The concert was a 
sellout, and later that evening, Keith would sit down at the 
piano and play.
* improvise: 즉흥적으로 연주하다
(B)
When Keith began to play, everybody immediately knew 
this was magic. Erik too was deeply touched. Keith was 
unexpectedly producing the performance of a lifetime 
despite the shortcomings of the piano. (b) His left hand 
produced thundering, repetitive bass riffs as a way of 
covering up the piano’s lack of resonance. Keith really had 
to play that piano very hard to get enough volume to get to 
the balconies. Standing up and sitting down, Keith played 
the unplayable piano to produce something unique. It wasn’t 
the music that he ever imagined playing. But faced with a 
challenge, he accepted it and flew high.
* bass riff: 저음 반복 악절  ** resonance: 울림, 반향
(C)
Understandably, Keith didn’t want to perform. He left and 
went to wait in his car, leaving Erik to anticipate the arrival 
of soon-to-be furious concert-goers. Desperate, (c) the 
German teenager caught up with Keith and begged the jazz 
pianist to play. The pianist looked out at him standing in the 
rain, completely soaked, and took pity on him. “Never 
forget,” Keith said. “Only for (d) you.” A few hours later, 
Keith walked out to the unplayable piano in front of a 
packed concert hall.
(D)
But when Erik introduced Keith and his producer Manfred 
to the piano on the stage that afternoon, it didn’t go well. 
Keith and Manfred played a few notes. Then after a long 
silence, Manfred came to (e) him and said, “Erik, if you 
don’t get another piano, Keith can’t play tonight.” Erik knew 
that Keith had requested a specific instrument, which the 
Opera House had agreed to provide. What he hadn’t realized 
was that the administrative staff hadn’t been able to find the 
requested Bösendorfer piano, and they had instead installed 
a tiny little Bösendorfer that was in poor condition.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)
② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
것은?
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
45. 윗글의 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 연주회의 표가 매진되었다.
② 연주가 시작되자마자 관객들은 감동을 받았다.
③ Keith는 충분한 피아노 음량을 만들기 위해 노력했다.
④ Keith는 빗속에 서 있는 Erik을 보고도 외면했다.
⑤ Keith와 Manfred는 연주회장의 피아노를 쳐 보았다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
