1
8
  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Not yet. I forgot to send it.
② Of course. You can have it.
③ Sorry. We’re sold out of pictures.
④ Right. You shouldn’t buy a book.
⑤ No, thanks. I don’t want an album.
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Okay. I’ll ask him if he’d like to.
② Too bad. He went back yesterday.
③ Exactly. I plan to visit Korea later.
④ No. I want to stay longer if possible.
⑤ Right. We haven’t been to Germany.
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
① 스마트폰 사용 자제를 당부하려고
② 청취자의 문자 참여를 권유하려고
③ 프로그램 방송 시간 변경을 공지하려고
④ 라디오 앱의 새로운 기능을 소개하려고
⑤ 음원 불법 다운로드의 유해성을 경고하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 운동과 숙면은 밀접한 관계가 있다.
② 시골 생활은 건강한 삶에 도움이 된다.
③ 규칙적인 식습관은 장수의 필수 조건이다.
④ 야외 활동은 스트레스 해소에 효과적이다.
⑤ 가정의 화목은 가족 간의 대화에서 시작된다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 시민 － 경찰관
② 환자 － 간호사
③ 학생 － 소방관
④ 고객 － 차량 정비사
⑤ 학부모 － 영양사
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 
고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 티셔츠 주문하기
② 호텔 예약하기
③ 로고 디자인하기
④ 출장 신청하기
⑤ 항공권 취소하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 영화를 보고 있는 이유를 고르시오.
① 맡은 배역을 더 잘 이해하고 싶어서
② 훌륭한 영화감독이 되고 싶어서
③ 좋아하는 장르의 작품이어서
④ 주연 배우들을 좋아해서
⑤ 작문 숙제를 해야 해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $36
② $45
③ $54
④ $60
⑤ $63
10. 대화를 듣고, Winter Discovery Camp에 관해 언급되지 않은 
것을 고르시오.
① 참가 대상
② 활동 내용
③ 기간
④ 기념품
⑤ 참가비
11. Global Design Conference에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 
않는 것을 고르시오.
① Chicago에서 매년 개최된다.
② 유명 디자이너들의 강연이 있을 것이다.
③ 100명의 디자이너가 제작한 작품들이 전시될 것이다.
④ 6월 20일에 시작한다.
⑤ 등록비는 환불이 가능하다.
2018학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
1
제 3 교시
홀수형
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
홀수형
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구입할 재킷을 고르시오.
Blackhills Hiking Jackets
Model
Price
Pockets
Waterproof
Color
①
A
$40
3
☓
brown
②
B
$55
4
○
blue
③
C
$65
5
○
yellow
④
D
$70
6
☓
gray
⑤
E
$85
6
○
black
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① I agree. The place was too crowded.
② Of course. It’s very warm downtown.
③ All right. Let’s go on a bus tour then.
④ Sure. Our last vacation was the best ever.
⑤ Yes. The hotel is within walking distance.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Thanks for understanding. I hope it won’t cause any trouble.
② Certainly. I was deeply touched when you sent the message.
③ Good news. The orchestra is still looking for new members.
④ You’re welcome. I did what I had to do for the orientation.
⑤ That’s right. I couldn’t have won the election without you.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, David가 Julia에게 할 말로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
David:
① We need to check what we did last year.
② Why don’t we cancel the program this year?
③ Let me assign this work to the other teachers.
④ How about joining the program after school?
⑤ Let’s ask the students what they prefer to do.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① relationship between music and civilization
② materials used to make musical instruments
③ trends in modern art around the world
④ ways to preserve ancient instruments
⑤ use of music for rest and relaxation
17. 언급된 나라가 아닌 것은?
① China
② Mongolia
③ Nigeria
④ Australia
⑤ Colombia
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 단체 관람 시 유의 사항을 안내하려고
② 교내 행사에 초청할 강사 추천을 부탁하려고 
③ 프로그램 단체 예약이 가능한지를 문의하려고
④ 새로운 체험 학습 프로그램을 소개하려고
⑤ 견학 예정 인원수의 변경을 요청하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
The start of the boat tour was far from what I had expected. 
None of the wildlife I saw was exotic. I could only see dull 
gray rocks. It was also so hot and humid that I could not 
enjoy the tour fully. However, as the boat slid into the Bay 
Park Canal, all of a sudden my mother shouted, “Look at the 
mangroves!” A whole new world came into sight. The 
mangrove forest alongside the canal thrilled me as we entered 
its cool shade. I was fascinated by the beautiful leaves and 
flowers of the mangroves. But best of all, I was charmed by 
the native birds, monkeys, and lizards moving among the 
branches. “What a wonderful adventure!” I exclaimed.
* mangrove: 맹그로브(강가나 늪지에서 자라는 열대 나무) 
① ashamed → relaxed
② disappointed → excited
③ delighted → confused
④ pleased 
→ lonely
⑤ scared
→ relieved
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
At the 2015 Fortune Most Powerful Women Summit, Ginni 
Rometty offered this advice: “When did you ever learn the 
most in your life? What experience? I guarantee you’ll tell 
me it was a time you felt at risk.” To become a better leader, 
you have to step out of your comfort zone. You have to 
challenge the conventional ways of doing things and search for 
opportunities to innovate. Exercising leadership not only 
requires you to challenge the organizational status quo but 
also requires you to challenge your internal status quo. You 
have to challenge yourself. You have to venture beyond the 
boundaries of your current experience and explore new 
territory. Those are the places where there are opportunities to 
improve, innovate, experiment, and grow. Growth is always 
at the edges, just outside the boundaries of where you are 
right now.
* status quo: 현재 상태
① 지도자는 실현 가능한 목표를 설정해야 한다.
② 지도자는 새로운 제도를 적극적으로 도입해야 한다.
③ 지도자는 조직의 현재 상태를 철저히 분석해야 한다.
④ 지도자는 현재의 자신을 넘어서는 도전을 해야 한다.
⑤ 지도자는 기존의 방식과 새로운 방식을 조화시켜야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
Dear Ms. Diane Edwards,
 I am a teacher working at East End High School. I 
have read from your notice that the East End Seaport 
Museum is now offering a special program, the 2017 
Bug Lighthouse Experience. The program would be a 
great opportunity for our students to have fun and 
experience something new. I estimate that 50 students 
and teachers from our school would like to participate 
in it. Would you please let me know if it is possible to 
make a group reservation for the program for Saturday, 
November 18? We don’t want to miss this great 
opportunity. I look forward to hearing from you soon. 
Best regards, 
Joseph Loach
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형
3
3
8
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
One exercise in teamwork I do at a company retreat is to 
put the group in a circle. At one particular retreat, there were 
eight people in the circle, and I slowly handed tennis balls to 
one person to start throwing around the circle. If N equals the 
number of people in the circle, then the maximum number of 
balls you can have in motion is N minus 1. Why? Because it’s 
almost impossible to throw and catch at the same time. The 
purpose of the exercise is to demonstrate the importance of an 
individual’s action. People are much more concerned about 
catching the ball than throwing it. What this demonstrates is 
that it’s equally important to the success of the exercise that 
the person you’re throwing to catches the ball as that you are 
able to catch the ball. If you’re less concerned about how you 
deliver information than with how you receive it, you’ll 
ultimately fail at delegation. You have to be equally skilled at 
both.
* delegation: 위임
① 구성원 간의 공통된 목표 의식이 협업의 필수 조건이다.
② 정확한 정보 이해는 신속한 업무 수행을 가능하게 한다.
③ 자유로운 의사소통 문화는 직무 만족도 향상에 기여한다.
④ 여가 활동을 함께하는 것도 협업의 효율성을 증가시킨다.
⑤ 협업에서는 정보를 전달하는 방식에도 능숙할 필요가 있다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Sensory-specific satiety is defined as a decrease in appetite, 
or the subjective liking for the food that is consumed, with 
little change in the hedonics of uneaten food. As a result of 
sensory-specific satiety, when people consume a variety of 
foods, they tend to overeat. A greater variety of food leads 
people to eat more than they would otherwise. So, being full 
and feeling sated are separate matters. The recovery of 
appetite or the motivation to eat is apparent to anyone who 
has consumed a large meal and is quite full, and does not 
require additional energy or nutrients to meet their daily 
needs, but decides to consume additional calories after seeing 
the dessert cart. Small changes in the sensory properties of 
foods are sufficient to increase food intake. For example, 
subjects who were presented with different shapes of pasta 
showed increased hedonic ratings and increased energy 
consumption relative to subjects eating only a single shape of 
pasta.
* satiety: 포만(감)
** hedonics: 쾌락
*** sated: 충분히 만족한
① necessity of consuming a varied diet in daily life 
② reasons for people’s rejection of unfamiliar foods
③ changes in people’s preference for basic food items
④ impact of food variety on the amount of food people consume 
⑤ importance of maintaining food diversity to prevent overeating
23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Individual authors and photographers have rights to their 
intellectual property during their lifetimes, and their heirs 
have rights for 70 years after the creator’s death, so any 
publication less than 125 years old has to be checked for its 
copyright status. The duration of copyright protection has 
increased steadily over the years; the life-plus-70-years 
standard was set by the Copyright Term Extension Act of 
1998, which increased the 50-year limit established by the 
1976 Copyright Act. Supporters of such legislation like to 
defend these increases with tales of starving writers and their 
impoverished descendants, but in reality the beneficiaries are 
more likely to be transnational publishing companies. And 
note that copyright laws serve a dual purpose. In addition to 
protecting the rights of authors so as to encourage the 
publication of new creative works, copyright is also supposed 
to place reasonable time limits on those rights so that 
outdated works may be incorporated into new creative efforts. 
Therefore, the extended copyright protection frustrates new 
creative endeavors such as including poetry and song lyrics 
on Internet sites.
* heir: 상속인  ** legislation: 법률, 입법
① The Untold Origin of Copyright Protection
② Creativity Leaps with Longer Copyright Protection! 
③ More Is Not Enough: No Limits to Copyright Coverage
④ Who Smiles at Copyright Protection, Writers or Publishers?
⑤ Does Extended Copyright Truly Enhance Protection and Creation?
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the sales of four types of ethical 
produce in the UK in 2010 and 2015. ① In 2015, the sales of 
each of the four types of ethical produce showed an increase 
from the sales of its corresponding type in 2010. ② Among 
the four types of ethical produce, the sales of Organic ranked 
the highest in 2010 but ranked the second highest in 2015. 
③ Among the four types of ethical produce, Rainforest 
Alliance recorded the second highest sales in 2010 and 
recorded the highest sales in 2015. ④ The sales of Fairtrade 
in 2015 were twice as high as those in 2010. ⑤ In both 2010 
and 2015, the sales of Vegetarian meat alternatives were the 
lowest among the four types of ethical produce.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
홀수형
4
8
25. Jim Marshall에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The late photographer Jim Marshall is regarded as one of 
the most celebrated photographers of the 20th century. He 
holds the distinction of being the first and only photographer 
to be presented with the Grammy Trustees Award. He started 
as a professional photographer in 1959. He was given 
unrivaled access to rock’s biggest artists, including the 
Rolling Stones, Bob Dylan, and Ray Charles. He was the only 
photographer granted backstage access for the Beatles’ final 
full concert and also shot the Rolling Stones on their historic 
1972 tour. He formed special bonds with the artists he worked 
with and those relationships helped him capture some of his 
most vivid and iconic imagery. Over a 50-year career, the 
photographs he took appeared on more than 500 album 
covers. He was passionate about his work up until the end. “I 
have no kids,” he used to say. “My photographs are my 
children.”
① Grammy Trustees Award가 수여된 최초이자 유일한 사진작가이다.
② 1959년에 직업 사진작가로 일하기 시작했다.
③ Rolling Stones의 역사적인 1972년 투어에서 그들을 촬영했다.
④ 함께 작업한 예술가들과 특별한 유대 관계를 맺지 않았다.
⑤ 500개가 넘는 앨범 커버에 그가 촬영한 사진들이 실렸다. 
26. 2018 CVL Volleyball Camp에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
일치하지 않는 것은?
① 고등학생을 대상으로 한다.
② 참가자들은 수준에 따라 훈련을 받을 것이다.
③ 오전에 연습 경기를 실시한다.
④ 참가자들은 배구공과 캠프 티셔츠를 받을 것이다.
⑤ 마지막 날에 대학 배구 선수들이 방문할 것이다.
27. Eugene Community Charity Fun Hike에 관한 다음 안내문의 
내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 올해의 기부금 전액은 어린이 도서관 공사비로 사용된다.
② 안전 교육은 오전 10시에 시작한다.
③ 각 참가자는 두 개의 코스를 선택할 수 있다.
④ 점심 식사가 제공된다. 
⑤ 하이킹을 완료한 참가자들은 메달을 받을 것이다.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
Psychologists who study giving behavior ① have noticed 
that some people give substantial amounts to one or two 
charities, while others give small amounts to many charities. 
Those who donate to one or two charities seek evidence about 
what the charity is doing and ② what it is really having a 
positive impact. If the evidence indicates that the charity is 
really helping others, they make a substantial donation. Those 
who give small amounts to many charities are not so 
interested in whether what they are ③ doing helps others ─
psychologists call them warm glow givers. Knowing that they 
are giving makes ④ them feel good, regardless of the impact 
of their donation. In many cases the donation is so small ─
$10 or less ─ that if they stopped ⑤ to think, they would 
realize that the cost of processing the donation is likely to 
exceed any benefit it brings to the charity.
2018 CVL Volleyball Camp
The College Volleyball League (CVL) is hosting a camp 
for high school students from January 23 to 27.
Training Program 
After a brief skills test, participants will be trained 
based on their levels.
∙Basic Level: serving, tossing, and spiking 
∙Advanced Level: individual plays and team strategies
Daily Schedule
∙9 a.m.－11 a.m.: one-on-one skills training 
∙1 p.m.－4 p.m.: practice game sessions 
Note
∙Participation fee is $100. 
∙Participants will receive a volleyball and a camp T-shirt.
∙College volleyball players will visit to offer advice to 
participants on the final day of the camp.
For more information, visit our website at www.CVL.org.
All donations this year go toward purchasing
new books for the children’s library!
∙Date: Saturday, December 2, 2017
∙Place: Peterson National Park
∙Registration & Safety Instruction: 9:00 a.m.－9:30 a.m.
∙Start Time: 10:00 a.m.
How to Participate
∙Each participant should set a goal for donation by 
choosing only one of the following courses:
   － Course A: 2 miles ($20) 
   － Course B: 3 miles ($30)
   － Course C: 5 miles ($50 or more)
∙Participants should make their donations before the start.
What to Bring
∙Participants should bring comfortable shoes and 
sunscreen.
∙Lunch is not provided, so please bring your own 
refreshments.
Participants who complete their hike will receive a 
medal. For more information, please call 234-567-1234.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형
5
5
8
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
않은 것은?
Some prominent journalists say that archaeologists should 
work with treasure hunters because treasure hunters have 
accumulated valuable historical artifacts that can reveal 
much about the past. But archaeologists are not asked to 
cooperate with tomb robbers, who also have valuable 
historical artifacts. The quest for profit and the search for 
knowledge cannot coexist in archaeology because of the 
① time factor. Rather incredibly, one archaeologist employed 
by a treasure hunting firm said that as long as archaeologists 
are given six months to study shipwrecked artifacts before 
they are sold, no historical knowledge is ② found! On the 
contrary, archaeologists and assistants from the INA (Institute 
of Nautical Archaeology) needed more than a decade of 
year-round conservation before they could even ③ catalog all 
the finds from an eleventh-century AD wreck they had 
excavated. Then, to interpret those finds, they had to ④ learn 
Russian, Bulgarian, and Romanian, without which they would 
never have learned the true nature of the site. Could 
a “commercial archaeologist” have ⑤ waited more than a 
decade or so before selling the finds?
* prominent: 저명한  ** excavate: 발굴하다
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 것은?
Scott Adams, the creator of Dilbert, one of the most 
successful comic strips of all time, says that two personal 
letters dramatically changed his life. One night ① he was 
watching a PBS-TV program about cartooning, when he 
decided to write to the host of the show, Jack Cassady, to ask 
for his advice about becoming a cartoonist. Much to ② his 
surprise, he heard back from Cassady within a few weeks in 
the form of a handwritten letter. The letter advised Adams not 
to be discouraged if he received early rejections. Adams got 
inspired and submitted some cartoons, but ③ he was quickly 
rejected. Not following Cassady’s advice, ④ he became 
discouraged, put his materials away, and decided to forget 
cartooning as a career. About fifteen months later, he was 
surprised to receive yet another letter from Cassady, 
especially since he hadn’t thanked ⑤ him for his original 
advice. He acted again on Cassady’s encouragement, but this 
time he stuck with it and obviously hit it big.
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Apocalypse Now, a film produced and directed by Francis 
Ford Coppola, gained widespread popularity, and for good 
reason. The film is an adaptation of Joseph Conrad’s novel 
Heart of Darkness, which is set in the African Congo at the 
end of the 19th century. Unlike the original novel, Apocalypse 
Now is set in Vietnam and Cambodia during the Vietnam War. 
The setting, time period, dialogue and other incidental details 
are changed but the fundamental narrative and themes of 
Apocalypse Now are the same as those of Heart of Darkness. 
Both describe a physical journey, reflecting the central 
character’s mental and spiritual journey, down a river to 
confront the deranged Kurtz character, who represents the 
worst aspects of civilisation. By giving Apocalypse Now a 
setting that was contemporary at the time of its release, 
audiences were able to experience and identify with its 
themes more easily than they would have if the film had been   
                                                                                        . [3점]
* deranged: 제정신이 아닌
① a literal adaptation of the novel
② a source of inspiration for the novel
③ a faithful depiction of the Vietnam War
④ a vivid dramatisation of a psychological journey 
⑤ a critical interpretation of contemporary civilisation
32. How many of the lunches that you ate over the last week 
can you recall? Do you remember what you ate today? I hope 
so. Yesterday? I bet it takes a moment’s effort. And what 
about the day before yesterday? What about a week ago? It’s 
not so much that your memory of last week’s lunch has 
disappeared; if provided with the right cue, like where you 
ate it, or whom you ate it with, you would likely recall what 
had been on your plate. Rather, it’s difficult to remember last 
week’s lunch because your brain has filed it away with all 
the other lunches you’ve ever eaten as just another lunch. 
When we try to recall something from a category that 
includes as many instances as “lunch” or “wine,” many 
memories compete for our attention. The memory of last 
Wednesday’s lunch isn’t necessarily gone; it’s that you lack     
                                                                                          . But 
a wine that talks: That’s unique. It’s a memory without rivals.
[3점]
① the channel to let it flow into the pool of ordinary memories
② the right hook to pull it out of a sea of lunchtime memories
③ the glue to attach it to just another lunch memory
④ the memory capacity to keep a box of sleeping memories 
⑤ the sufficient number of competitors in a battle for attention
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
홀수형
6
8
33. In the less developed world, the percentage of the 
population involved in agriculture is declining, but at the 
same time, those remaining in agriculture are not benefiting 
from technological advances. The typical scenario in the less 
developed world is one in which a very few commercial 
agriculturalists are technologically advanced while the vast 
majority are incapable of competing. Indeed, this vast majority  
                                                                                      because 
of larger global causes. As an example, in Kenya, farmers are 
actively encouraged to grow export crops such as tea and 
coffee at the expense of basic food production. The result is 
that a staple crop, such as maize, is not being produced in a 
sufficient amount. The essential argument here is that the 
capitalist mode of production is affecting peasant production 
in the less developed world in such a way as to limit the 
production of staple foods, thus causing a food problem. [3점]
* staple: 주요한  ** maize: 옥수수  *** peasant: 소농(小農)
① have lost control over their own production
② have turned to technology for food production
③ have challenged the capitalist mode of production
④ have reduced their involvement in growing cash crops
⑤ have regained their competitiveness in the world market
34. Over the past 60 years, as mechanical processes have 
replicated behaviors and talents we thought were unique to 
humans, we’ve had to change our minds about what sets 
us apart. As we invent more species of AI, we will be 
forced to surrender more of what is supposedly unique 
about humans. Each step of surrender ─ we are not the only 
mind that can play chess, fly a plane, make music, or invent 
a mathematical law ─ will be painful and sad. We’ll spend 
the next three decades ─ indeed, perhaps the next century ─
in a permanent identity crisis, continually asking ourselves 
what humans are good for. If we aren’t unique toolmakers, 
or artists, or moral ethicists, then what, if anything, makes 
us special? In the grandest irony of all, the greatest benefit 
of an everyday, utilitarian AI will not be increased 
productivity or an economics of abundance or a new way of 
doing science ─ although all those will happen. The 
greatest benefit of the arrival of artificial intelligence is that  
                                                                                         . [3점]
* replicate: 복제하다
① AIs will help define humanity
② humans could also be like AIs
③ humans will be liberated from hard labor 
④ AIs could lead us in resolving moral dilemmas
⑤ AIs could compensate for a decline in human intelligence
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
In the context of SNS, media literacy has been argued to 
be especially important “in order to make the users aware 
of their rights when using SNS tools, and also help them 
acquire or reinforce human rights values and develop the 
behaviour necessary to respect other people’s rights and 
freedoms”. ① With regard to peer-to-peer risks such as 
bullying, this last element is of particular importance. ② This 
relates to a basic principle that children are taught in the 
offline world as well: ‘do not do to others what you would 
not want others to do to you’. ③ Children’s SNS activities 
should be encouraged when we help them accumulate 
knowledge. ④ This should also be a golden rule with regard 
to SNS, but for children and young people it is much more 
difficult to estimate the consequences and potential serious 
impact of their actions in this environment. ⑤ Hence, raising 
awareness of children from a very early age about the 
particular characteristics of SNS and the potential long-term 
impact of a seemingly trivial act is crucial.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
Most consumer magazines depend on subscriptions and 
advertising. Subscriptions account for almost 90 percent 
of total magazine circulation. Single-copy, or newsstand, 
sales account for the rest.
(A) For example, the Columbia Journalism Review is 
marketed toward professional journalists and its few 
advertisements are news organizations, book publishers, 
and others. A few magazines, like Consumer Reports, 
work toward objectivity and therefore contain no 
advertising.
(B) However, single-copy sales are important: they bring in 
more revenue per magazine, because subscription prices 
are typically at least 50 percent less than the price of 
buying single issues.
(C) Further, potential readers explore a new magazine by 
buying a single issue; all those insert cards with 
subscription offers are included in magazines to 
encourage you to subscribe. Some magazines are 
distributed only by subscription. Professional or trade 
magazines are specialized magazines and are often 
published by professional associations. They usually 
feature highly targeted advertising.
* revenue: 수입
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형
7
7
8
37.
To modern man disease is a biological phenomenon that 
concerns him only as an individual and has no moral 
implications. When he contracts influenza, he never 
attributes this event to his behavior toward the tax 
collector or his mother-in-law.
(A) Sometimes they may not strike the guilty person himself, 
but rather one of his relatives or tribesmen, to whom 
responsibility is extended. Disease, action that might 
produce disease, and recovery from disease are, 
therefore, of vital concern to the whole primitive 
community.
(B) Disease, as a sanction against social misbehavior, 
becomes one of the most important pillars of order in 
such societies. It takes over, in many cases, the role 
played by policemen, judges, and priests in modern 
society. 
(C) Among primitives, because of their supernaturalistic 
theories, the prevailing moral point of view gives a 
deeper meaning to disease. The gods who send disease 
are usually angered by the moral offences of the 
individual. [3점]
* sanction: 제재
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
Experiments show that rats display an immediate liking 
for salt the first time they experience a salt deficiency. 
Both humans and rats have evolved taste preferences for 
sweet foods, which provide rich sources of calories. A study 
of food preferences among the Hadza hunter-gatherers of 
Tanzania found that honey was the most highly preferred food 
item, an item that has the highest caloric value. ( ① ) Human 
newborn infants also show a strong preference for sweet 
liquids. ( ② ) Both humans and rats dislike bitter and sour 
foods, which tend to contain toxins. ( ③ ) They also 
adaptively adjust their eating behavior in response to deficits 
in water, calories, and salt. ( ④ ) They likewise increase 
their intake of sweets and water when their energy and fluids 
become depleted. ( ⑤ ) These appear to be specific evolved 
mechanisms, designed to deal with the adaptive problem of 
food selection, and coordinate consumption patterns with 
physical needs.
* deficiency: 결핍  ** deplete: 고갈시키다
39.
It is postulated that such contamination may result from 
airborne transport from remote power plants or municipal 
incinerators.
An incident in Japan in the 1950s alerted the world to the 
potential problems of organic mercury in fish. Factories were 
discharging mercury into the waters of Minamata Bay, which 
also harbored a commercial fishing industry. Mercury was being 
bioaccumulated in the fish tissue and severe mercury poisoning 
occurred in many people who consumed the fish. ( ① ) The 
disabling neurological symptoms were subsequently called 
Minamata disease. ( ② ) Control over direct discharge of 
mercury from industrial operations is clearly needed for 
prevention. ( ③ ) However, it is now recognized that traces of 
mercury can appear in lakes far removed from any such 
industrial discharge. ( ④ ) Strictly controlled emission standards 
for such sources are needed to minimize this problem. ( ⑤ ) 
Fish advisories have been issued for many lakes in the United 
States; these recommend limits on the number of times per 
month particular species of fish should be consumed.
* postulate: 가정하다  ** incinerator: 소각로
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), 
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Time spent on on-line interaction with members of one’s 
own, preselected community leaves less time available for 
actual encounters with a wide variety of people. If physicists, 
for example, were to concentrate on exchanging email and 
electronic preprints with other physicists around the world 
working in the same specialized subject area, they would 
likely devote less time, and be less receptive to new ways of 
looking at the world. Facilitating the voluntary construction 
of highly homogeneous social networks of scientific 
communication therefore allows individuals to filter the 
potentially overwhelming flow of information. But the 
result may be the tendency to overfilter it, thus eliminating 
the diversity of the knowledge circulating and diminishing 
the frequency of radically new ideas. In this regard, even a 
journey through the stacks of a real library can be more 
fruitful than a trip through today’s distributed virtual 
archives, because it seems difficult to use the available 
“search engines” to emulate efficiently the mixture of 
predictable and surprising discoveries that typically result 
from a physical shelf-search of an extensive library collection.
* homogeneous: 동종의  ** emulate: 따라 하다
󰀻
Focusing on on-line interaction with people who are 
engaged in the same specialized area can 
(A)
 
potential sources of information and thus make it less 
probable for 
(B)
 findings to happen.
(A)
(B)
(A)
(B)
① limit
……unexpected
② limit
……distorted
③ diversify ……misleading
④ diversify ……accidental
⑤ provide ……novel
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
홀수형
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
In one sense, every character you create will be yourself. 
You’ve never murdered, but your murderer’s rage will be 
drawn from memories of your own extreme anger. Your love 
scenes will contain hints of your own past kisses and sweet 
moments. That scene in which your octogenarian feels 
humiliated will draw on your experience of humiliation in 
the eighth grade, even though the circumstances are totally 
different and you’re not even consciously thinking about 
your middle-school years. Our characters’ emotions, after 
all, draw on our own emotions. Sometimes, however, you 
will want to use your life more directly in your fiction, 
dramatizing actual incidents. Charles Dickens used his 
desperate experience as a child laborer in Victorian England 
to write David Copperfield. Should you create a protagonist 
based directly on yourself? The problem with this ─ and it 
is a very large problem ─ is that almost no one can view 
himself                   on the page. As the writer, you’re too 
close to your own complicated makeup. It can thus be easier 
and more effective to use a situation or incident from your 
life but make it happen to a character who is not you. In fact, 
that’s what authors largely have done. You can still, of 
course, incorporate aspects of yourself: your love of 
Beethoven, your quick temper, your soccer injuries. But by 
applying your own experience to a different protagonist, you 
can take advantage of your insider knowledge of the 
situation, and yet gain an objectivity and control that the 
original intense situation, by definition, did not have.
* octogenarian: 80대의 사람  ** protagonist: 주인공
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Simplicity: The Essence of Great Novels
② Protagonists: A Key to Understanding Novels
③ Keep Your Memories Away from Novel Writing!
④ Character Traits Borrowed from People You Know
⑤ A Better Way to Use Yourself in Character Creation
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① objectively
② intuitively
③ devotedly
④ emotionally
⑤ favorably
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
It was the first day of the new semester. Steve and Dave 
were excited that they would be back at school again. They 
rode their bicycles to school together that morning, as they 
usually did. Dave had math on the first floor, and Steve was 
on the second with history. On his way to the classroom, 
Steve’s teacher came up to him to ask if (a) he wanted to run 
for student president. Steve thought for a moment and 
answered, “Sure, it’ll be a great experience.”
(B)
Steve won the election. Upon hearing the result, Dave went 
over to Steve and congratulated (b) him, shaking his hand. 
Steve could still see the disappointment burning in his eyes. It 
wasn’t until later that evening, on the way home, that Dave 
said apologetically, “I’m so sorry, Steve! This election hasn’t 
damaged our friendship, has it?” “Of course not, Dave. We’re 
friends as always!” Steve responded with a smile. As Steve 
arrived home, his dad was proudly waiting for him and said, 
“Congratulations on the win! How did Dave take it?” Steve 
replied, “We’re fine now, best friends for life!” (c) His dad 
laughed, “Sounds like you won two battles today!”
(C)
After class, Steve spotted Dave in the hallway and ran to him 
excitedly, “I’ve got good news! I’m going for student president 
and I think mine will be the only nomination.” Dave cleared his 
throat and replied with surprise, “Actually, I’ve just registered 
my name, too!” (d) He continued sharply, “Well, best of luck! 
But don’t think you’ll win the election, Steve.” Dave walked 
quickly away and from that moment on, there was an 
uncomfortable air of tension between the two friends. Steve 
tried to be friendly toward Dave, but he just didn’t seem to care.
(D)
When the election day came, Steve found that his bicycle 
had a flat tire, so he started to run to school. Just as he 
reached the end of the street, Dave’s dad, who was driving 
Dave to school, pulled over to give him a ride. The dead 
silence in the car made the drive painful. Noticing the bad 
atmosphere, Dave’s dad said, “You know, only one of you 
can win. You have known each other since birth. Don’t let 
this election ruin your friendship. Try to be happy for each 
other!” His words hit Dave hard. Looking at Steve, Dave felt 
the need to apologize to (e) him later that day.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)
② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
것은?
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 개학 날 아침에 Steve와 Dave는 함께 등교했다. 
② Steve는 학생회장으로 당선되었다. 
③ Steve는 Dave에게 선거 출마 사실을 숨겼다.
④ Dave의 아버지는 학교로 뛰어가던 Steve를 차에 태워 주었다.
⑤ Dave의 아버지는 선거로 인해 우정을 잃지 말라고 충고했다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
