1
8
  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Okay. I’ll send the address to your phone.
② Yes. I’ll have your dress cleaned by noon.
③ Of course. I’ll open the shop tomorrow.
④ No. I’m not moving to a new place.
⑤ Too late. I’m already back at home.
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. 
① Unbelievable. I’m really going to be on stage today.
② Absolutely. I’m so eager to see him sing in person.
③ Not really. He wasn’t as amazing as I expected.
④ Sure. I’ll find someone else to perform instead.
⑤ Oh, no. You shouldn’t have missed his performance.
3. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
① 백화점 주말 특별 행사를 안내하려고
② 백화점 층별 신규 매장을 소개하려고
③ 주차장 이용 요금 변경을 공지하려고
④ 고객 만족도 조사 참여를 요청하려고
⑤ 백화점 회원 가입 방법을 설명하려고
4. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 왼쪽 신체의 잦은 사용은 두뇌 활동을 촉진한다.
② 수면 시간과 심장 기능은 밀접한 관련이 있다.
③ 왼쪽으로 누워 자는 것은 건강에 도움이 된다.
④ 규칙적인 운동은 소화 불량 개선에 필수적이다.
⑤ 숙면은 정신 건강을 유지하는 데 중요한 요인이다.
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 곤충학자 － 학생
② 동물 조련사 － 사진작가
③ 농부 － 잡지기자
④ 요리사 － 음식 평론가
⑤ 독자 － 소설가
6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 
고르시오. 
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 간식 가져오기
② 책 기부하기
③ 점심 준비하기
④ 설거지하기
⑤ 세탁실 청소하기
8. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 요리 대회 참가를 포기한 이유를 고르시오.
① 다친 팔이 낫지 않아서
② 조리법을 완성하지 못해서
③ 다른 대회와 일정이 겹쳐서
④ 입학시험 공부를 해야 해서
⑤ 대회 전에 유학을 떠나야 해서
9. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $72
② $74
③ $76
④ $78
⑤ $80
10. 대화를 듣고, Ten Year Class Reunion Party에 관해 언급되지 
않은 것을 고르시오. 
① 장소
② 날짜
③ 회비
④ 음식
⑤ 기념품
11. Green Ocean 영화 시사회에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치
하지 않는 것을 고르시오. 
① 100명을 초대할 예정이다.
② 다음 주 토요일 오후 4시에 시작할 것이다.
③ 영화 출연 배우와 사진을 찍을 수 있다.
④ 입장권을 우편으로 보낼 예정이다.
⑤ 초대받은 사람은 극장에서 포스터를 받을 것이다.
2020학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
1
제 3 교시
홀수형
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
홀수형
2
8
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 예약할 항공편을 
고르시오.
Flight Schedule to New York City Area
Flight Ticket Price Departure Time Arrival Airport
Stops
①
A
$600
6:00 a.m.
JFK
1 stop
②
B
$625
10:00 a.m.
Newark
Nonstop
③
C
$700
11:30 a.m.
JFK
1 stop
④
D
$785
2:30 p.m.
JFK
Nonstop
⑤
E
$810
6:30 p.m.
Newark
1 stop
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
① It’s worthwhile to spend money on my suit.
② It would be awesome to borrow your brother’s.
③ Your brother will have a fun time at the festival.
④ I’m looking forward to seeing you in a new suit.
⑤ You’re going to build a great reputation as an MC.
 
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Definitely! This book isn’t as interesting as yours.
② Terrific! I’ll check right away if there are any nearby.
③ Never mind. I won’t take that course next semester.
④ Really? I didn’t know you have a degree in philosophy. 
⑤ Why not? You can join my philosophy discussion group.
 
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Brian의 어머니가 Brian에게 할 말로 
가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Brian’s mother:
① Make sure to call me whenever you go somewhere new.
② School trips are good opportunities to make friends.
③ I believe traveling broadens your perspective.
④ How about carrying the luggage on your own?
⑤ Why don’t you pack your bag by yourself for the trip?
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? 
① animals used in delivering mail in history
② difficulty of training animals from the wild
③ animals’ adaptation to environmental changes
④ endangered animals in different countries
⑤ ways animals sent each other messages
17. 언급된 동물이 아닌 것은?
① horses
② pigeons
③ eagles
④ dogs
⑤ camels
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Mr. Kayne,
I am a resident of Cansinghill Apartments, located right 
next to the newly opened Vuenna Dog Park. As I live with 
three dogs, I am very happy to let my dogs run around and 
safely play with other dogs from the neighborhood. 
However, the noise of barking and yelling from the park at 
night is so loud and disturbing that I cannot relax in my 
apartment. Many of my apartment neighbors also seriously 
complain about this noise. I want immediate action to 
solve this urgent problem. Since you are the manager of 
Vuenna Dog Park, I ask you to take measures to prevent 
the noise at night. I hope to hear from you soon.
Sincerely,
Monty Kim
① 애완견 예방 접종 일정을 확인하려고 
② 애완견 공원의 야간 이용 시간을 문의하려고
③ 아파트 내 애완견 출입 금지 구역을 안내하려고
④ 아파트 인근에 개장한 애완견 공원을 홍보하려고
⑤ 애완견 공원의 야간 소음 방지 대책을 촉구하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Jonas의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? 
Looking out the bus window, Jonas could not stay calm. He 
had been looking forward to this field trip. It was the first field 
trip for his history course. His history professor had recommended 
it to the class, and Jonas had signed up enthusiastically. He was 
the first to board the bus in the morning. The landscape looked 
fascinating as the bus headed to Alsace. Finally arriving in 
Alsace after three hours on the road, however, Jonas saw 
nothing but endless agricultural fields. The fields were vast, 
but hardly appealed to him. He had expected to see some old 
castles and historical monuments, but now he saw nothing like 
that awaiting him. “What can I learn from these boring fields?” 
Jonas said to himself with a sigh.
① excited → disappointed
② indifferent → thrilled 
③ amazed → horrified
④ surprised
→ relieved
⑤ worried → confident
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Probably the biggest roadblock to play for adults is the worry 
that they will look silly, improper, or dumb if they allow themselves 
to truly play. Or they think that it is irresponsible, immature, and 
childish to give themselves regularly over to play. Nonsense and 
silliness come naturally to kids, but they get pounded out by norms 
that look down on “frivolity.” This is particularly true for people 
who have been valued for performance standards set by parents 
or the educational system, or measured by other cultural norms 
that are internalized and no longer questioned. If someone has 
spent his adult life worried about always appearing respectable, 
competent, and knowledgeable, it can be hard to let go sometimes 
and become physically and emotionally free. The thing is this: You 
have to give yourself permission to improvise, to mimic, to take 
on a long-hidden identity. 
* frivolity: 경박함
** improvise: 즉흥적으로 하다
① 어른도 규범에 얽매이지 말고 자유롭게 놀이를 즐겨야 한다. 
② 아동에게 사회 규범을 내면화할 수 있는 놀이를 제공해야 한다.
③ 개인의 창의성을 극대화할 수 있는 놀이 문화를 조성해야 한다. 
④ 타인의 시선을 의식하지 않고 자신의 목표 달성에 매진해야 한다. 
⑤ 어른을 위한 잠재력 계발 프로그램에서 놀이의 비중을 늘려야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형
3
3
8
21. 밑줄 친 playing intellectual air guitar가 다음 글에서 의미
하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Any learning environment that deals with only the database 
instincts or only the improvisatory instincts ignores one half of 
our ability. It is bound to fail. It makes me think of jazz 
guitarists: They’re not going to make it if they know a lot 
about music theory but don’t know how to jam in a live 
concert. Some schools and workplaces emphasize a stable, 
rote-learned database. They ignore the improvisatory instincts 
drilled into us for millions of years. Creativity suffers. Others 
emphasize creative usage of a database, without installing a 
fund of knowledge in the first place. They ignore our need to 
obtain a deep understanding of a subject, which includes 
memorizing and storing a richly structured database. You get 
people who are great improvisers but don’t have depth of 
knowledge. You may know someone like this where you 
work. They may look like jazz musicians and have the 
appearance of jamming, but in the end they know nothing. 
They’re playing intellectual air guitar.
* rote-learned: 기계적으로 암기한
① acquiring necessary experience to enhance their creativity
② exhibiting artistic talent coupled with solid knowledge of music
③ posing as experts by demonstrating their in-depth knowledge 
④ performing musical pieces to attract a highly educated audience
⑤ displaying seemingly creative ability not rooted in firm knowledge
22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
In retrospect, it might seem surprising that something as 
mundane as the desire to count sheep was the driving force for 
an advance as fundamental as written language. But the desire 
for written records has always accompanied economic activity, 
since transactions are meaningless unless you can clearly keep 
track of who owns what. As such, early human writing is 
dominated by wheeling and dealing: a collection of bets, bills, 
and contracts. Long before we had the writings of the prophets, 
we had the writings of the profits. In fact, many civilizations 
never got to the stage of recording and leaving behind the kinds 
of great literary works that we often associate with the history 
of culture. What survives these ancient societies is, for the 
most part, a pile of receipts. If it weren’t for the commercial 
enterprises that produced those records, we would know far, 
far less about the cultures that they came from. 
* mundane: 세속의
** prophet: 예언자
① 고대 사회에서 경제 활동은 문자 기록의 원동력이었다.
② 고전 문학을 통해 당대의 경제 활동을 파악할 수 있다.
③ 경제 발전의 정도가 문명의 발달 수준을 결정한다.
④ 종교의 역사는 상업의 역사보다 먼저 시작되었다.
⑤ 모든 문명이 위대한 작가를 배출한 것은 아니다.
23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Human beings do not enter the world as competent moral 
agents. Nor does everyone leave the world in that state. But 
somewhere in between, most people acquire a bit of decency that 
qualifies them for membership in the community of moral agents. 
Genes, development, and learning all contribute to the process of 
becoming a decent human being. The interaction between nature 
and nurture is, however, highly complex, and developmental 
biologists are only just beginning to grasp just how complex it is. 
Without the context provided by cells, organisms, social groups, 
and culture, DNA is inert. Anyone who says that people are 
“genetically programmed” to be moral has an oversimplified 
view of how genes work. Genes and environment interact in ways 
that make it nonsensical to think that the process of moral 
development in children, or any other developmental process, can 
be discussed in terms of nature versus nurture. Developmental 
biologists now know that it is really both, or nature through 
nurture. A complete scientific explanation of moral evolution and 
development in the human species is a very long way off. 
* decency: 예의
** inert: 비활성의 
① evolution of human morality from a cultural perspective 
② difficulties in studying the evolutionary process of genes
③ increasing necessity of educating children as moral agents
④ nature versus nurture controversies in developmental biology
⑤ complicated gene-environment interplay in moral development 
24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Invasions of natural communities by non-indigenous species 
are currently rated as one of the most important global-scale 
environmental problems. The loss of biodiversity has generated 
concern over the consequences for ecosystem functioning and 
thus understanding the relationship between both has become a 
major focus in ecological research during the last two decades. The 
“biodiversity-invasibility hypothesis” by Elton suggests that high 
diversity increases the competitive environment of communities 
and makes them more difficult to invade. Numerous biodiversity 
experiments have been conducted since Elton’s time and several 
mechanisms have been proposed to explain the often observed 
negative relationship between diversity and invasibility. Beside 
the decreased chance of empty ecological niches but the increased 
probability of competitors that prevent invasion success, diverse 
communities are assumed to use resources more completely and, 
therefore, limit the ability of invaders to establish. Further, more 
diverse communities are believed to be more stable because they 
use a broader range of niches than species-poor communities. 
* indigenous: 토착의
** niche: 생태적 지위
① Carve Out More Empty Ecological Spaces!
② Guardian of Ecology: Diversity Resists Invasion
③ Grasp All, Lose All: Necessity of Species-poor Ecology
④ Challenges in Testing Biodiversity-Invasibility Hypothesis
⑤ Diversity Dilemma: The More Competitive, the Less Secure
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
홀수형
4
8
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graph shows the world population access to 
electricity in 1997 and in 2017. ① The percentage of the total 
world population with electricity access in 2017 was 11 
percentage points higher than that in 1997. ② Both in 1997 and 
in 2017, less than 80% of the rural population had access to 
electricity while over 90% of the urban population had access 
to electricity. ③ In 1997, 36% of the rural population did not 
have electricity access while 5% of the urban population did not 
have access to electricity. ④ The percentage of the rural 
population without electricity access in 2017 was 20 percentage 
points lower than that in 1997. ⑤ The percentage of the urban 
population without electricity access decreased from 5% in 
1997 to 3% in 2017.
26. The Nuer에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The Nuer are one of the largest ethnic groups in South 
Sudan, primarily residing in the Nile River Valley. The Nuer 
are a cattle-raising people, whose everyday lives revolve 
around their cattle. They have various terms related to cattle, 
so they can distinguish between hundreds of types of cows, 
based on color, markings, and shape of horns. They prefer to 
be called by the names of the cattle they raise. The commonest 
daily foods for the Nuer are dairy products, especially milk for 
the young and soured milk, like yogurt, for adults. And wild 
fruits and nuts are favorite snacks for the Nuer. The Nuer also 
have a culture of counting only older members of the family. 
They believe that counting the number of children one has 
could result in misfortune and prefer to report fewer children 
than they have. 
① 주로 Nile River Valley에 거주한다. 
② 소와 관련된 다양한 용어를 가지고 있다.
③ 자신들이 기르는 소의 이름으로 불리는 것을 선호한다.
④ 가장 일반적인 일상 음식은 유제품이다.
⑤ 어린 자녀의 수를 세는 것이 행운을 가져온다고 믿는다.
27. Green Tea Packaging Design Competition에 관한 다음 
안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 신제품 녹차를 위한 포장 상자 디자인 대회이다.
② Lokota County 주민들만 참가할 수 있다.
③ 출품작은 직접 방문하여 제출해야 한다.
④ 평가 기준에 창의성이 포함된다.
⑤ 1등 수상자의 서명이 포장 상자에 인쇄될 것이다.
28. 2019 Badminton Challenge for Charity에 관한 다음 안내문의 
내용과 일치하는 것은?
① Salke Children’s Hospital이 주최한다.
② 3명이 한 팀을 구성해서 참가해야 한다. 
③ 참가비는 한 사람당 100달러이다.
④ 20달러 추가 기부 시 배드민턴 기술을 배울 수 있다. 
⑤ 라켓과 셔틀콕은 제공되지 않는다. 
Green Tea Packaging Design Competition
Take the opportunity to design the packaging box for 
brand-new green tea products of TIIS Tea in the competition!
Deadline: December 2, 2019, 6:00 p.m. 
Participants: Lokota County residents only
Details 
∙Our company name “TIIS Tea” should appear on the design. 
∙The competition theme is “Go Green with Green Tea.”
∙Entries (JPG format only) should be submitted by email to 
designmanager@tiistea.com.
Evaluation Criteria 
∙Functionality
∙Creativity
∙Eco-friendliness 
Awards
∙1st place: $1,000
∙2nd place: $500
∙3rd place: $250
(The first-place winner’s signature will be printed on the 
packaging box.)
Please visit www.tiistea.com to learn more about the competition.
2019 Badminton Challenge for Charity 
Join the charity tournament event hosted by Cliffield 
Community Center! This event supports Salke Children’s 
Hospital.
When & Where
∙Saturday, November 23, 2:00 p.m.
∙Cliffield Sports Center 
How to Join the Tournament
∙Make a two-member team.
∙Pay your team’s $100 entry fee as a donation.
Activities
∙Challenge last year’s champion team to a 3-point match.
∙With an additional $20 donation, you can learn badminton 
skills from professional players.
※ Rackets and shuttlecocks will be provided.
Click here to register now!
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형
5
5
8
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? 
Speculations about the meaning and purpose of prehistoric 
art ① rely heavily on analogies drawn with modern-day 
hunter-gatherer societies. Such primitive societies, ② as 
Steven Mithen emphasizes in The Prehistory of the Modern 
Mind, tend to view man and beast, animal and plant, organic 
and inorganic spheres, as participants in an integrated, 
animated totality. The dual expressions of this tendency are 
anthropomorphism (the practice of regarding animals as 
humans) and totemism (the practice of regarding humans as 
animals), both of ③ which spread through the visual art and 
the mythology of primitive cultures. Thus the natural world is 
conceptualized in terms of human social relations. When 
considered in this light, the visual preoccupation of early 
humans with the nonhuman creatures ④ inhabited their world 
becomes profoundly meaningful. Among hunter-gatherers, 
animals are not only good to eat, they are also good to think 
about, as Claude Lévi-Strauss has observed. In the practice of 
totemism, he has suggested, an unlettered humanity “broods 
upon ⑤ itself and its place in nature.”
* speculation: 고찰
** analogy: 유사점
*** brood: 곰곰이 생각하다
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
않은 것은? [3점]
Suppose we know that Paula suffers from a severe phobia. If 
we reason that Paula is afraid either of snakes or spiders, and then 
① establish that she is not afraid of snakes, we will conclude that 
Paula is afraid of spiders. However, our conclusion is reasonable 
only if Paula’s fear really does concern either snakes or spiders. 
If we know only that Paula has a phobia, then the fact that she’s 
not afraid of snakes is entirely ② consistent with her being afraid 
of heights, water, dogs or the number thirteen. More generally, 
when we are presented with a list of alternative explanations for 
some phenomenon, and are then persuaded that all but one of 
those explanations are ③ unsatisfactory, we should pause to 
reflect. Before ④ denying that the remaining explanation is the 
correct one, consider whether other plausible options are being 
ignored or overlooked. The fallacy of false choice misleads 
when we’re insufficiently attentive to an important hidden 
assumption, that the choices which have been made explicit 
exhaust the ⑤ sensible alternatives.
* plausible: 그럴듯한
** fallacy: 오류
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. The role of science can sometimes be overstated, with its 
advocates slipping into scientism. Scientism is the view that 
the scientific description of reality is the only truth there is. 
With the advance of science, there has been a tendency to slip 
into scientism, and assume that any factual claim can be 
authenticated if and only if the term ‘scientific’ can correctly 
be ascribed to it. The consequence is that non-scientific 
approaches to reality ― and that can include all the arts, 
religion, and personal, emotional and value-laden ways of 
encountering the world ― may become labelled as merely 
subjective, and therefore of little 
 in terms of 
describing the way the world is. The philosophy of science 
seeks to avoid crude scientism and get a balanced view on 
what the scientific method can and cannot achieve.
* ascribe: 속하는 것으로 생각하다
** crude: 투박한
① question 
② account
③ controversy
④ variation
⑤ bias 
32. The Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget frequently analyzed 
children’s conception of time via their ability to compare or 
estimate the time taken by pairs of events. In a typical 
experiment, two toy cars were shown running synchronously 
on parallel tracks, 
. 
The children were then asked to judge whether the cars had 
run for the same time and to justify their judgment. 
Preschoolers and young school-age children confuse temporal 
and spatial dimensions: Starting times are judged by starting 
points, stopping times by stopping points and durations by 
distance, though each of these errors does not necessitate the 
others. Hence, a child may claim that the cars started and 
stopped running together (correct) and that the car which 
stopped further ahead, ran for more time (incorrect).
* synchronously: 같은 시간에 
① one running faster and stopping further down the track 
② both stopping at the same point further than expected
③ one keeping the same speed as the other to the end
④ both alternating their speed but arriving at the same end
⑤ both slowing their speed and reaching the identical spot
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
홀수형
6
8
33. The future of our high-tech goods may lie not in the limitations 
of our minds, but in 
. 
In previous eras, such as the Iron Age and the Bronze Age, the 
discovery of new elements brought forth seemingly unending 
numbers of new inventions. Now the combinations may truly be 
unending. We are now witnessing a fundamental shift in our 
resource demands. At no point in human history have we used 
more elements, in more combinations, and in increasingly refined 
amounts. Our ingenuity will soon outpace our material supplies. 
This situation comes at a defining moment when the world is 
struggling to reduce its reliance on fossil fuels. Fortunately, rare 
metals are key ingredients in green technologies such as electric 
cars, wind turbines, and solar panels. They help to convert free 
natural resources like the sun and wind into the power that fuels 
our lives. But without increasing today’s limited supplies, we 
have no chance of developing the alternative green technologies 
we need to slow climate change. [3점]
* ingenuity: 창의력
① our ability to secure the ingredients to produce them
② our effort to make them as eco-friendly as possible
③ the wider distribution of innovative technologies 
④ governmental policies not to limit resource supplies 
⑤ the constant update and improvement of their functions
34. There have been many attempts to define what music is in 
terms of the specific attributes of musical sounds. The famous 
nineteenth-century critic Eduard Hanslick regarded ‘the 
measurable tone’ as ‘the primary and essential condition of all 
music’. Musical sounds, he was saying, can be distinguished 
from those of nature by the fact that they involve the use of 
fixed pitches, whereas virtually all natural sounds consist of 
constantly fluctuating frequencies. And a number of 
twentieth-century writers have assumed, like Hanslick, that 
fixed pitches are among the defining features of music. Now it 
is true that in most of the world’s musical cultures, pitches are 
. However, 
this is a generalization about music and not a definition of it, 
for it is easy to put forward counter-examples. Japanese 
shakuhachi music and the sanjo music of Korea, for instance, 
fluctuate constantly around the notional pitches in terms of 
which the music is organized. [3점]
① not so much artificially fixed as naturally fluctuating
② not only fixed, but organized into a series of discrete steps
③ hardly considered a primary compositional element of music
④ highly diverse and complicated, and thus are immeasurable
⑤ a vehicle for carrying unique and various cultural features
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Although commonsense knowledge may have merit, it also 
has weaknesses, not the least of which is that it often contradicts 
itself. For example, we hear that people who are similar will like 
one another (“Birds of a feather flock together”) but also that 
persons who are dissimilar will like each other (“Opposites 
attract”). ① We are told that groups are wiser and smarter than 
individuals (“Two heads are better than one”) but also that group 
work inevitably produces poor results (“Too many cooks spoil 
the broth”). ② Each of these contradictory statements may hold 
true under particular conditions, but without a clear statement of 
when they apply and when they do not, aphorisms provide little 
insight into relations among people. ③ That is why we heavily 
depend on aphorisms whenever we face difficulties and 
challenges in the long journey of our lives. ④ They provide 
even less guidance in situations where we must make decisions. 
⑤ For example, when facing a choice that entails risk, which 
guideline should we use ― “Nothing ventured, nothing gained” 
or “Better safe than sorry”? 
* aphorism: 격언, 경구(警句)
** entail: 수반하다
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
Movies may be said to support the dominant culture and 
to serve as a means for its reproduction over time.
(A) The bad guys are usually punished; the romantic couple 
almost always find each other despite the obstacles and 
difficulties they encounter on the path to true love; and 
the way we wish the world to be is how, in the movies, it 
more often than not winds up being. No doubt it is this 
utopian aspect of movies that accounts for why we enjoy 
them so much.
(B) The simple answer to this question is that movies do more 
than present two-hour civics lessons or editorials on 
responsible behavior. They also tell stories that, in the 
end, we find satisfying.
(C) But one may ask why audiences would find such movies 
enjoyable if all they do is give cultural directives and 
prescriptions for proper living. Most of us would likely 
grow tired of such didactic movies and would probably 
come to see them as propaganda, similar to the cultural 
artwork that was common in the Soviet Union and other 
autocratic societies.
* didactic: 교훈적인
** autocratic: 독재적인
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형
7
7
8
37.
Traditionally, Kuhn claims, the primary goal of historians 
of science was ‘to clarify and deepen an understanding of 
contemporary scientific methods or concepts by displaying 
their evolution’.
(A) Some discoveries seem to entail numerous phases and 
discoverers, none of which can be identified as definitive. 
Furthermore, the evaluation of past discoveries and 
discoverers according to present-day standards does not 
allow us to see how significant they may have been in 
their own day.
(B) This entailed relating the progressive accumulation of 
breakthroughs and discoveries. Only that which survived in 
some form in the present was considered relevant. In the 
mid-1950s, however, a number of faults in this view of history 
became apparent. Closer analysis of scientific discoveries, 
for instance, led historians to ask whether the dates of 
discoveries and their discoverers can be identified precisely.
(C) Nor does the traditional view recognise the role that 
non-intellectual factors, especially institutional and 
socio-economic ones, play in scientific developments. Most 
importantly, however, the traditional historian of science 
seems blind to the fact that the concepts, questions and 
standards that they use to frame the past are themselves 
subject to historical change. [3점]
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
Thus, individuals of many resident species, confronted with 
the fitness benefits of control over a productive breeding 
site, may be forced to balance costs in the form of lower 
nonbreeding survivorship by remaining in the specific 
habitat where highest breeding success occurs. 
Resident-bird habitat selection is seemingly a straightforward 
process in which a young dispersing individual moves until it 
finds a place where it can compete successfully to satisfy its 
needs. ( ① ) Initially, these needs include only food and 
shelter. ( ② ) However, eventually, the young must locate, 
identify, and settle in a habitat that satisfies not only survivorship 
but reproductive needs as well. ( ③ ) In some cases, the 
habitat that provides the best opportunity for survival may not be 
the same habitat as the one that provides for highest reproductive 
capacity because of requirements specific to the reproductive 
period. ( ④ ) Migrants, however, are free to choose the 
optimal habitat for survival during the nonbreeding season and 
for reproduction during the breeding season. ( ⑤ ) Thus, 
habitat selection during these different periods can be quite 
different for migrants as opposed to residents, even among 
closely related species.
* disperse: 흩어지다
** optimal: 최적의
39.
Still, it is arguable that advertisers worry rather too much 
about this problem, as advertising in other media has 
always been fragmented. 
The fragmentation of television audiences during recent 
decades, which has happened throughout the globe as new 
channels have been launched everywhere, has caused advertisers 
much concern. ( ① ) Advertisers look back nostalgically to the 
years when a single spot transmission would be seen by the 
majority of the population at one fell swoop. ( ② ) This made 
the television advertising of mass consumer products relatively 
straightforward ― not to say easy ― whereas today it is necessary 
for advertisers to build up coverage of their target markets over 
time, by advertising on a host of channels with separate 
audiences. ( ③ ) Moreover, advertisers gain considerable 
benefits from the price competition between the numerous 
broadcasting stations. ( ④ ) And television remains much the 
fastest way to build up public awareness of a new brand or a new 
campaign. ( ⑤ ) Seldom does a new brand or new campaign 
that solely uses other media, without using television, reach high 
levels of public awareness very quickly. [3점]
* fragment: 조각내다
** at one fell swoop: 단번에, 일거에
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), 
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Because elephant groups break up and reunite very 
frequently ― for instance, in response to variation in food 
availability ― reunions are more important in elephant 
society than among primates. And the species has evolved 
elaborate greeting behaviors, the form of which reflects the 
strength of the social bond between the individuals (much like 
how you might merely shake hands with a long-standing 
acquaintance but hug a close friend you have not seen in a 
while, and maybe even tear up). Elephants may greet each 
other simply by reaching their trunks into each other’s mouths, 
possibly equivalent to a human peck on the cheek. However, 
after long absences, members of family and bond groups greet 
one another with incredibly theatrical displays. The fact that 
the intensity reflects the duration of the separation as well as 
the level of intimacy suggests that elephants have a sense of 
time as well. To human eyes, these greetings strike a familiar 
chord. I’m reminded of the joyous reunions so visible in the 
arrivals area of an international airport terminal.
* acquaintance: 지인
** peck: 가벼운 입맞춤
󰀻
The evolved greeting behaviors of elephants can serve as 
an indicator of how much they are socially 
(A)
 
and how long they have been 
(B)
. 
(A)
(B)
① competitive …… disconnected
② tied
…… endangered
③ responsible …… isolated
④ competitive …… united
⑤ tied 
…… parted
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
홀수형
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
For quite some time, science educators believed that 
“hands-on” activities were the answer to children’s 
understanding through their participation in science-related 
activities. Many teachers believed that students merely 
engaging in activities and (a) manipulating objects would 
organize the information to be gained and the knowledge to 
be understood into concept comprehension. Educators began 
to notice that the pendulum had swung too far to the 
“hands-on” component of inquiry as they realized that the 
knowledge was not (b) inherent in the materials themselves, 
but in the thought and metacognition about what students had 
done in the activity. We now know that “hands-on” is a 
dangerous phrase when speaking about learning science. The 
(c) missing ingredient is the “minds-on” part of the 
instructional experience. (d) Uncertainty about the knowledge 
intended in any activity comes from each student’s 
re-creation of concepts ― and discussing, thinking, arguing, 
listening, and evaluating one’s own preconceptions after the 
activities, under the leadership of a thoughtful teacher, can 
bring this about. After all, a food fight is a hands-on activity, 
but about all you would learn was something about the 
aerodynamics of flying mashed potatoes! Our view of what 
students need to build their knowledge and theories about the 
natural world (e) extends far beyond a “hands-on activity.” 
While it is important for students to use and interact with 
materials in science class, the learning comes from the 
sense-making of students’ “hands-on” experiences. 
* pendulum: 추(錘)
** metacognition: 초(超)인지
*** aerodynamics: 공기 역학 
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① “Hands-on” Activities as a Source of Creativity
② Activity-oriented Learning Enters Science Education!
③ Figure Out What Students Like Most in Science Class
④ Joy and Learning: More Effective When Separated
⑤ Turn “Minds-on” Learning On in Science Class
42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 
것은? [3점]
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
The colors of the trees looked like they were on fire, the 
reds and oranges competing with the yellows and golds. This 
was Nina’s favorite season, but she remained silent for hours 
while Marie was driving. Nina had been heartbroken after 
losing her championship belt. Now a former champion, she 
was thinking of retiring from boxing. Marie, her long-time 
friend and trainer, shared her pain. After another silent hour, 
Marie and Nina saw a sign: Sauble Falls. Marie thought this 
would be a good place for (a) them to stop.
(B)
Then, with a great push, a small one turned a complete 
circle and made it over the falls. “He made it!” Nina shouted 
at the success with admiration. More salmon then followed 
and succeeded. She felt ashamed to be looking at (b) them. 
After a moment, she turned to Marie and said, “Giving up is 
not in my vocabulary. Marie, I’ll get my championship belt 
back.” Marie nodded with a bright smile. “Our training 
begins tomorrow. It’s going to be tough. Are you ready?” 
Walking up the path and back to the car, (c) they could still 
hear the fish splashing in the water.
* splash: 물을 튀기다
(C)
Marie pulled over into the parking lot. Marie and Nina 
went down a path to watch the falls. Another sign: Watch 
Your Step. Rocks Are Slippery. (d) They found the falls 
spilling out in various layers of rock. No one was there 
except them. “Look at them!” Marie pointed to movement in 
the water moving toward the falls. Hundreds of fish tails 
were flashing and catching light from the sun, moving 
upstream. Beneath them in the water, they saw salmon slowly 
moving their bodies. 
(D)
While Marie and Nina kept watching the salmon, a big one 
suddenly leapt. It threw itself up and over the rushing water 
above, but in vain. (e) They were standing without a word 
and watching the fish struggling. Another jumped, its body 
spinning until it made it over the falls. Another one leapt and 
was washed back by the power of the water. Watching the 
salmon, Marie noticed Nina fixing her eyes on their 
continuing challenge. Nina’s heart was beating fast at each 
leap and twist. 
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C) 
② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
것은?
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Marie가 운전하는 동안 Nina는 말이 없었다. 
② Marie는 Nina의 오랜 친구이자 트레이너였다. 
③ 폭포에서 Nina는 Marie에게 권투를 그만두겠다고 말했다.
④ 폭포에 있는 사람은 Marie와 Nina뿐이었다. 
⑤ Nina는 폭포 위로 뛰어오르는 연어를 유심히 바라보았다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
