1
8
  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
① 헬스클럽 할인 행사를 안내하려고
② 동영상 업로드 방법을 설명하려고
③ 스포츠 중계방송 중단을 예고하려고
④ 체육관 보수 공사 일정 변경을 공지하려고
⑤ 운동 방법에 관한 동영상 채널을 홍보하려고
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 별 관찰은 아이들이 수학 개념에 친숙해지도록 도와준다.
② 아이들은 별 관찰을 통해 예술적 영감을 얻는다.
③ 야외 활동이 아이들의 신체 발달에 필수적이다.
④ 아이들은 자연을 경험함으로써 인격적으로 성장한다.
⑤ 수학 문제 풀이는 아이들의 논리적 사고력을 증진시킨다.
3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 학생 － 건축가
② 신문 기자 － 화가
③ 탐험가 － 환경 운동가
④ 건물 관리인 － 정원사
⑤ 교사 － 여행사 직원
4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
① 사진 전송하기
② 그림 그리기
③ 휴대 전화 찾기
④ 생물 보고서 제출하기
⑤ 야생화 개화 시기 검색하기
6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $180
② $190
③ $200
④ $210
⑤ $230
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 텐트를 반품하려는 이유를 고르시오.
① 크기가 작아서
② 캠핑이 취소되어서
③ 운반하기 무거워서
④ 설치 방법이 어려워서
⑤ 더 저렴한 제품을 찾아서
8. 대화를 듣고, Bradford Museum of Failure에 관해 언급되지 
않은 것을 고르시오.
① 전시품 
② 설립 목적
③ 개관 연도
④ 입장료
⑤ 위치
9. National Baking Competition에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 해마다 열리는 행사이다.
② 올해의 주제는 건강한 디저트이다.
③ 20명이 결선에 진출할 것이다.
④ 수상자들의 조리법이 잡지에 실릴 것이다.
⑤ 웹 사이트에서 생중계될 것이다.
10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 주문할 재사용 빨대 
세트를 고르시오.
Reusable Straw Sets (3 pieces)
Set
Material
Price
Length
 (inches)
Carrying 
Case
①
A
Bamboo
$5.99
7
☓
②
B
Glass
$6.99
7
◯
③
C
Glass
$7.99
8
☓
④
D
Silicone
$8.99
8
◯
⑤
E
Stainless Steel
$11.99
9
◯
11. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I don’t feel like going out today.
② You must get to the airport quickly.
③ How about going to the cafe over there?
④ I didn’t know you wanted to go sightseeing.
⑤ Why didn’t you wear more comfortable shoes?
12. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I see. Then I’ll park somewhere else.
② It’s all right. I’ll bring your car over here.
③ No thanks. I don’t want my car to be painted.
④ Never mind. I’ll pay the parking fee later.
⑤ Okay. I’ll choose another car instead.
2021학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
1
제 3 교시
홀수형
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
홀수형
2
8
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① Sorry. I don’t think I can wait until tomorrow for this one.
② I agree. The displayed one may be the best option for me.
③ Oh, no. It’s too bad you don’t sell the displayed model.
④ Good. Call me when my washing machine is repaired.
⑤ Exactly. I’m glad that you bought the displayed one.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① Don’t worry. I already found his briefcase.
② Of course. You deserve to receive the award.
③ Don’t mention it. I just did my duty as a citizen.
④ Definitely. I want to go to congratulate him myself.
⑤ Wonderful. It was the best ceremony I’ve ever been to.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Ben이 Stacy에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오. [3점]
Ben:
① Feel free to take the tomatoes from my backyard.
② Tell me if you need help when planting tomatoes.
③ Do you want the ripe tomatoes I picked yesterday?
④ Why don’t we grow tomatoes in some other places?
⑤ Let me take care of your tomatoes while you’re away.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① color change in nature throughout seasons
② various colors used in traditional English customs
③ differences in color perceptions according to culture
④ why expressions related to colors are common in English
⑤ how color-related English expressions gained their meanings
17. 언급된 색깔이 아닌 것은?
① blue
② white
③ green
④ red
⑤ yellow
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Friends, 
Season’s greetings. As some of you already know, we are 
starting the campus food drive. This is how you participate. 
You can bring your items for donation to our booths. Our 
donation booths are located in the lobbies of the campus 
libraries. Just drop off the items there during usual library 
hours from December 4 to 23. The donated food should be 
non-perishable like canned meats and canned fruits. Packaged 
goods such as jam and peanut butter are also good. We will 
distribute the food to our neighbors on Christmas Eve. We 
truly appreciate your help.
Many blessings, 
Joanna at Campus Food Bank 
① 음식 기부에 참여하는 방법을 안내하려고 
② 음식 배달 자원봉사 참여에 감사하려고
③ 도서관 이용 시간 변경을 공지하려고
④ 음식물 낭비의 심각성을 알려 주려고
⑤ 크리스마스 행사 일정을 문의하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
Once again, I had lost the piano contest to my friend. When 
I learned that Linda had won, I was deeply troubled and 
unhappy. My body was shaking with uneasiness. My heart 
beat quickly and my face became reddish. I had to run out of 
the concert hall to settle down. Sitting on the stairs alone, I 
recalled what my teacher had said. “Life is about winning, not 
necessarily about winning against others but winning at being 
you. And the way to win is to figure out who you are and do 
your best.” He was absolutely right. I had no reason to oppose 
my friend. Instead, I should focus on myself and my own 
improvement. I breathed out slowly. My hands were steady 
now. At last, my mind was at peace.
① grateful → sorrowful
② upset
→ calm
③ envious → doubtful
④ surprised → disappointed
⑤ bored
→ relieved
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Developing expertise carries costs of its own. We can 
become experts in some areas, like speaking a language or 
knowing our favorite foods, simply by living our lives, but in 
many other domains expertise requires considerable training 
and effort. What’s more, expertise is domain specific. The 
expertise that we work hard to acquire in one domain will 
carry over only imperfectly to related ones, and not at all to 
unrelated ones. In the end, as much as we may want to become 
experts on everything in our lives, there simply isn’t enough 
time to do so. Even in areas where we could, it won’t 
necessarily be worth the effort. It’s clear that we should 
concentrate our own expertise on those domains of choice that 
are most common and/or important to our lives, and those we 
actively enjoy learning about and choosing from. 
① 자신에게 의미 있는 영역을 정해서 전문성을 키워야 한다.
② 전문성 함양에는 타고난 재능보다 노력과 훈련이 중요하다.
③ 전문가가 되기 위해서는 다양한 분야에 관심을 가져야 한다.
④ 전문성을 기르기 위해서는 구체적인 계획과 실천이 필수적이다.
⑤ 전문가는 일의 우선순위를 결정해서 업무를 수행해야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형
3
3
8
21. 밑줄 친 the role of the ‘lion’s historians’가 다음 글에서 의미
하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
There is an African proverb that says, ‘Till the lions have 
their historians, tales of hunting will always glorify the hunter’. 
The proverb is about power, control and law making. 
Environmental journalists have to play the role of the ‘lion’s 
historians’. They have to put across the point of view of the 
environment to people who make the laws. They have to be the 
voice of wild India. The present rate of human consumption is 
completely unsustainable. Forest, wetlands, wastelands, coastal 
zones, eco-sensitive zones, they are all seen as disposable for 
the accelerating demands of human population. But to ask for 
any change in human behaviour ― whether it be to cut down on 
consumption, alter lifestyles or decrease population growth ―
is seen as a violation of human rights. But at some point human 
rights become ‘wrongs’. It’s time we changed our thinking so 
that there is no difference between the rights of humans and the 
rights of the rest of the environment.
① uncovering the history of a species’ biological evolution
② urging a shift to sustainable human behaviour for nature
③ fighting against widespread violations of human rights
④ rewriting history for more underrepresented people
⑤ restricting the power of environmental lawmakers
22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Prior to file-sharing services, music albums landed exclusively 
in the hands of music critics before their release. These critics 
would listen to them well before the general public could and 
preview them for the rest of the world in their reviews. Once 
the internet made music easily accessible and allowed even 
advanced releases to spread through online social networks, 
availability of new music became democratized, which meant 
critics no longer had unique access. That is, critics and 
laypeople alike could obtain new music simultaneously. Social 
media services also enabled people to publicize their views on 
new songs, list their new favorite bands in their social media 
bios, and argue over new music endlessly on message boards. 
The result was that critics now could access the opinions of the 
masses on a particular album before writing their reviews. 
Thus, instead of music reviews guiding popular opinion toward 
art (as they did in preinternet times), music reviews began to 
reflect ― consciously or subconsciously ― public opinion. 
* laypeople: 비전문가
① 미디어 환경의 변화로 음악 비평이 대중의 영향을 받게 되었다.
② 인터넷의 발달로 다양한 장르의 음악을 접하는 것이 가능해졌다.
③ 비평가의 음악 비평은 자신의 주관적인 경험을 기반으로 한다. 
④ 오늘날 새로운 음악은 대중의 기호를 확인한 후에 공개된다.
⑤ 온라인 환경의 대두로 음악 비평의 질이 전반적으로 상승하였다.
23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Difficulties arise when we do not think of people and 
machines as collaborative systems, but assign whatever tasks 
can be automated to the machines and leave the rest to people. 
This ends up requiring people to behave in machine-like 
fashion, in ways that differ from human capabilities. We 
expect people to monitor machines, which means keeping alert 
for long periods, something we are bad at. We require people 
to do repeated operations with the extreme precision and 
accuracy required by machines, again something we are not 
good at. When we divide up the machine and human 
components of a task in this way, we fail to take advantage of 
human strengths and capabilities but instead rely upon areas 
where we are genetically, biologically unsuited. Yet, when 
people fail, they are blamed. 
① difficulties of overcoming human weaknesses to avoid failure
② benefits of allowing machines and humans to work together
③ issues of allocating unfit tasks to humans in automated systems
④ reasons why humans continue to pursue machine automation
⑤ influences of human actions on a machine’s performance
24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
People don’t usually think of touch as a temporal 
phenomenon, but it is every bit as time-based as it is spatial. 
You can carry out an experiment to see for yourself. Ask a 
friend to cup his hand, palm face up, and close his eyes. Place 
a small ordinary object in his palm ― a ring, an eraser, 
anything will do ― and ask him to identify it without moving 
any part of his hand. He won’t have a clue other than weight 
and maybe overall size. Then tell him to keep his eyes closed 
and move his fingers over the object. He’ll most likely identify 
it at once. By allowing the fingers to move, you’ve added time 
to the sensory perception of touch. There’s a direct analogy 
between the fovea at the center of your retina and your 
fingertips, both of which have high acuity. Your ability to 
make complex use of touch, such as buttoning your shirt or 
unlocking your front door in the dark, depends on continuous 
time-varying patterns of touch sensation.
* analogy: 유사
** fovea: (망막의) 중심와(窩)
*** retina: 망막
① Touch and Movement: Two Major Elements of Humanity
② Time Does Matter: A Hidden Essence of Touch
③ How to Use the Five Senses in a Timely Manner
④ The Role of Touch in Forming the Concept of Time
⑤ The Surprising Function of Touch as a Booster of Knowledge
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
홀수형
4
8
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The graph above shows the online shares of retail sales for 
each of six countries in 2012 and in 2019. The online share of 
retail sales refers to the percentage of retail sales conducted 
online in a given country. ① For each country, its online share 
of retail sales in 2019 was larger than that in 2012. ② Among 
the six countries, the UK owned the largest online share of retail 
sales with 19.7% in 2019. ③ In 2019, the U.S. had the second 
largest online share of retail sales with 16.5%. ④ In 2012, the 
online share of retail sales in the Netherlands was larger than 
that in France, whereas the reverse was true in 2019. ⑤ In the 
case of Spain and Italy, the online share of retail sales in each 
country was less than 5.0% both in 2012 and in 2019.
26. Frank Hyneman Knight에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 
않는 것은?
Frank Hyneman Knight was one of the most influential 
economists of the twentieth century. After obtaining his Ph.D. 
in 1916 at Cornell University, Knight taught at Cornell, the 
University of Iowa, and the University of Chicago. Knight 
spent most of his career at the University of Chicago. Some of 
his students at Chicago later received the Nobel Prize. Knight 
is known as the author of the book Risk, Uncertainty and Profit, 
a study of the role of the entrepreneur in economic life. He also 
wrote a brief introduction to economics entitled The Economic 
Organization, which became a classic of microeconomic theory. 
But Knight was much more than an economist; he was also a 
social philosopher. Later in his career, Knight developed his 
theories of freedom, democracy, and ethics. After retiring in 1952, 
Knight remained active in teaching and writing.
* entrepreneur: 기업가
① 20세기의 가장 영향력 있는 경제학자들 중 한 명이었다.
② 경력의 대부분을 University of Chicago에서 보냈다.
③ 그의 학생들 중 몇 명은 나중에 노벨상을 받았다.
④ Risk, Uncertainty and Profit의 저자로 알려져 있다.
⑤ 은퇴 후에는 가르치는 일은 하지 않고 글 쓰는 일에 전념했다.
27. City of Sittka Public Bike Sharing Service에 관한 다음 
안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 신용 카드 결제만 가능하다.
② 처음 30분은 무료이다.
③ 자전거의 QR 코드를 스캔해서 이용한다.
④ 헬멧이 제공된다.
⑤ 자전거의 OK 버튼을 눌러서 반납을 완료한다.
28. Jason’s Photography Class에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
일치하는 것은?
① 오전에 시작된다.
② 3층에서 진행된다.
③ 중급자 수준이다.
④ 다루는 주제 중 하나는 특수 효과이다.
⑤ 수강 학생 수에는 제한이 없다.
City of Sittka Public Bike Sharing Service
Are you planning to explore the city?
This is the eco-friendly way to do it!
Rent
∙Register anywhere via our easy app. 
∙Payment can be made only by credit card.
Fee
∙Free for the first 30 minutes
∙One dollar per additional 30 minutes
Use
∙Choose a bike and scan the QR code on the bike. 
∙Helmets are not provided.
Return
∙Return the bike to the Green Zone shown on the app.
∙Complete the return by pressing the OK button on the bike.
Jason’s Photography Class
Are you tired of taking pictures with your camera set to 
“Auto”? Do you want to create more professional-looking 
photos? You won’t want to miss this opportunity.
∙Date: Saturday, December 19
∙Time: 1:30 p.m. — 5:30 p.m.
∙Place: Thrombon Building, Room 2 on the first floor
∙Tuition Fee: $50 (snacks provided) 
∙Level: Beginner
∙Topics to Be Covered: 
󰠂 Equipment Selection
󰠂 Lighting Techniques
󰠂 Color Selection
󰠂 Special Effects
∙Class size is limited to eight, so don’t delay!
Visit our web site at www.eypcap.com to register.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형
5
5
8
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
Regulations covering scientific experiments on human subjects 
are strict. Subjects must give their informed, written consent, 
and experimenters must submit their proposed experiments to 
thorough examination by overseeing bodies. Scientists who 
experiment on themselves can, functionally if not legally, avoid 
the restrictions ① associated with experimenting on other people. 
They can also sidestep most of the ethical issues involved: 
nobody, presumably, is more aware of an experiment’s potential 
hazards than the scientist who devised ② it. Nonetheless, 
experimenting on oneself remains ③ deeply problematic. One 
obvious drawback is the danger involved; knowing that it 
exists ④ does nothing to reduce it. A less obvious drawback is 
the limited range of data that the experiment can generate. 
Human anatomy and physiology vary, in small but significant 
ways, according to gender, age, lifestyle, and other factors. 
Experimental results derived from a single subject are, therefore, 
of limited value; there is no way to know ⑤ what the subject’s 
responses are typical or atypical of the response of humans as a 
group.
* consent: 동의
** anatomy: (해부학적) 구조
*** physiology: 생리적 현상
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
않은 것은?
How the bandwagon effect occurs is demonstrated by the 
history of measurements of the speed of light. Because this 
speed is the basis of the theory of relativity, it’s one of the 
most frequently and carefully measured ① quantities in science. 
As far as we know, the speed hasn’t changed over time. 
However, from 1870 to 1900, all the experiments found speeds 
that were too high. Then, from 1900 to 1950, the ② opposite 
happened ― all the experiments found speeds that were too 
low! This kind of error, where results are always on one side of 
the real value, is called “bias.” It probably happened because 
over time, experimenters subconsciously adjusted their results 
to ③ match what they expected to find. If a result fit what 
they expected, they kept it. If a result didn’t fit, they threw it out. 
They weren’t being intentionally dishonest, just ④ influenced 
by the conventional wisdom. The pattern only changed when 
someone ⑤ lacked the courage to report what was actually 
measured instead of what was expected.
* bandwagon effect: 편승 효과
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. In the classic model of the Sumerian economy, the temple 
functioned as an administrative authority governing commodity 
production, collection, and redistribution. The discovery of 
administrative tablets from the temple complexes at Uruk 
suggests that token use and consequently writing evolved as a 
tool of centralized economic governance. Given the lack of 
archaeological evidence from Uruk-period domestic sites, it is 
not clear whether individuals also used the system for 
. For that matter, it is not clear 
how widespread literacy was at its beginnings. The use of 
identifiable symbols and pictograms on the early tablets is 
consistent with administrators needing a lexicon that was 
mutually intelligible by literate and nonliterate parties. As 
cuneiform script became more abstract, literacy must have 
become increasingly important to ensure one understood what 
he or she had agreed to.
* archaeological: 고고학적인
** lexicon: 어휘 목록
*** cuneiform script: 쐐기 문자
① religious events
② personal agreements
③ communal responsibilities
④ historical records
⑤ power shifts
32. Choosing similar friends can have a rationale. Assessing 
the survivability of an environment can be risky (if an 
environment turns out to be deadly, for instance, it might be 
too late by the time you found out), so humans have evolved 
the desire to associate with similar individuals as a way to 
perform this function efficiently. This is especially useful to a 
species that lives in so many different sorts of environments. 
However, the carrying capacity of a given environment 
. If resources 
are very limited, the individuals who live in a particular place 
cannot all do the exact same thing (for example, if there are 
few trees, people cannot all live in tree houses, or if mangoes 
are in short supply, people cannot all live solely on a diet of 
mangoes). A rational strategy would therefore sometimes be to 
avoid similar members of one’s species.
① exceeds the expected demands of a community
② is decreased by diverse means of survival
③ places a limit on this strategy
④ makes the world suitable for individuals
⑤ prevents social ties to dissimilar members
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
홀수형
6
8
33. Thanks to newly developed neuroimaging technology, we 
now have access to the specific brain changes that occur during 
learning. Even though all of our brains contain the same basic 
structures, our neural networks are as unique as our fingerprints. 
The latest developmental neuroscience research has shown 
that the brain is much more malleable throughout life than 
previously assumed; it develops in response to its own 
processes, to its immediate and distant “environments,” and 
to its past and current situations. The brain seeks to create 
meaning through establishing or refining existing neural 
networks. When we learn a new fact or skill, our neurons 
communicate to form networks of connected information. Using 
this knowledge or skill results in structural changes to allow 
similar future impulses to travel more quickly and efficiently 
than others. High-activity synaptic connections are stabilized 
and strengthened, while connections with relatively low use are 
weakened and eventually pruned. In this way, our brains are 
. [3점]
* malleable: 순응성이 있는
** prune: 잘라 내다
① sculpted by our own history of experiences
② designed to maintain their initial structures
③ geared toward strengthening recent memories
④ twinned with the development of other organs
⑤ portrayed as the seat of logical and creative thinking
34. Successful integration of an educational technology is 
marked by that technology being regarded by users as an 
unobtrusive facilitator of learning, instruction, or performance. 
When the focus shifts from the technology being used to the 
educational purpose that technology serves, then that 
technology is becoming a comfortable and trusted element, 
and can be regarded as being successfully integrated. Few 
people give a second thought to the use of a ball-point pen 
although the mechanisms involved vary ― some use a twist 
mechanism and some use a push button on top, and there are 
other variations as well. Personal computers have reached a 
similar level of familiarity for a great many users, but certainly 
not for all. New and emerging technologies often introduce 
both fascination and frustration with users. As long as 
 in 
promoting learning, instruction, or performance, then one 
ought not to conclude that the technology has been successfully 
integrated ― at least for that user. [3점]
* unobtrusive: 눈에 띄지 않는
① the user successfully achieves familiarity with the technology
② the user’s focus is on the technology itself rather than its use
③ the user continues to employ outdated educational techniques
④ the user involuntarily gets used to the misuse of the technology
⑤ the user’s preference for interaction with other users persists
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Workers are united by laughing at shared events, even ones 
that may initially spark anger or conflict. Humor reframes 
potentially divisive events into merely “laughable” ones which 
are put in perspective as subservient to unifying values held 
by organization members. Repeatedly recounting humorous 
incidents reinforces unity based on key organizational values.
① One team told repeated stories about a dumpster fire, 
something that does not seem funny on its face, but the 
reactions of workers motivated to preserve safety sparked 
laughter as the stories were shared multiple times by multiple 
parties in the workplace. ② Shared events that cause laughter 
can indicate a sense of belonging since “you had to be there” 
to see the humor in them, and non-members were not and do 
not. ③ Since humor can easily capture people’s attention, 
commercials tend to contain humorous elements, such as funny 
faces and gestures. ④ Instances of humor serve to enact bonds 
among organization members. ⑤ Understanding the humor may 
even be required as an informal badge of membership in the 
organization.
* subservient: 도움이 되는
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
The objective of battle, to “throw” the enemy and to 
make him defenseless, may temporarily blind commanders 
and even strategists to the larger purpose of war. War is 
never an isolated act, nor is it ever only one decision.
(A) To be political, a political entity or a representative of a 
political entity, whatever its constitutional form, has to 
have an intention, a will. That intention has to be clearly 
expressed.
(B) In the real world, war’s larger purpose is always a political 
purpose. It transcends the use of force. This insight was 
famously captured by Clausewitz’s most famous phrase, 
“War is a mere continuation of politics by other means.”
(C) And one side’s will has to be transmitted to the enemy at 
some point during the confrontation (it does not have to be 
publicly communicated). A violent act and its larger political 
intention must also be attributed to one side at some point 
during the confrontation. History does not know of acts of 
war without eventual attribution.
* entity: 실체
** transcend: 초월하다
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형
7
7
8
37.
Experts have identified a large number of measures that 
promote energy efficiency. Unfortunately many of them are 
not cost effective. This is a fundamental requirement for 
energy efficiency investment from an economic perspective. 
(A) And this has direct repercussions at the individual level: 
households can reduce the cost of electricity and gas bills, 
and improve their health and comfort, while companies 
can increase their competitiveness and their productivity. 
Finally, the market for energy efficiency could contribute 
to the economy through job and firms creation. 
(B) There are significant externalities to take into account and 
there are also macroeconomic effects. For instance, at the 
aggregate level, improving the level of national energy 
efficiency has positive effects on macroeconomic issues 
such as energy dependence, climate change, health, national 
competitiveness and reducing fuel poverty.
(C) However, the calculation of such cost effectiveness is not 
easy: it is not simply a case of looking at private costs and 
comparing them to the reductions achieved. [3점]
* repercussion: 반향, 영향
** aggregate: 집합의
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
I have still not exactly pinpointed Maddy’s character since 
wickedness takes many forms. 
 
Imagine I tell you that Maddy is bad. Perhaps you infer from 
my intonation, or the context in which we are talking, that I 
mean morally bad. Additionally, you will probably infer that I 
am disapproving of Maddy, or saying that I think you should 
disapprove of her, or similar, given typical linguistic conventions 
and assuming I am sincere. ( ① ) However, you might not 
get a more detailed sense of the particular sorts of way in 
which Maddy is bad, her typical character traits, and the like, 
since people can be bad in many ways. ( ② ) In contrast, if I 
say that Maddy is wicked, then you get more of a sense of her 
typical actions and attitudes to others. ( ③ ) The word ‘wicked’ 
is more specific than ‘bad’. ( ④ ) But there is more detail 
nevertheless, perhaps a stronger connotation of the sort of 
person Maddy is. ( ⑤ ) In addition, and again assuming 
typical linguistic conventions, you should also get a sense that 
I am disapproving of Maddy, or saying that you should 
disapprove of her, or similar, assuming that we are still 
discussing her moral character.
* connotation: 함축 
39.
Note that copyright covers the expression of an idea and 
not the idea itself. 
Designers draw on their experience of design when approaching 
a new project. This includes the use of previous designs that they 
know work ― both designs that they have created themselves and 
those that others have created. ( ① ) Others’ creations often spark 
inspiration that also leads to new ideas and innovation. ( ② ) This 
is well known and understood. ( ③ ) However, the expression 
of an idea is protected by copyright, and people who infringe on 
that copyright can be taken to court and prosecuted. ( ④ ) This 
means, for example, that while there are numerous smartphones 
all with similar functionality, this does not represent an 
infringement of copyright as the idea has been expressed in 
different ways and it is the expression that has been 
copyrighted. ( ⑤ ) Copyright is free and is automatically 
invested in the author, for instance, the writer of a book or a 
programmer who develops a program, unless they sign the 
copyright over to someone else. [3점]
* infringe: 침해하다
** prosecute: 기소하다
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), 
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
From a cross-cultural perspective the equation between 
public leadership and dominance is questionable. What does 
one mean by ‘dominance’? Does it indicate coercion? Or 
control over ‘the most valued’? ‘Political’ systems may be 
about both, either, or conceivably neither. The idea of 
‘control’ would be a bothersome one for many peoples, as 
for instance among many native peoples of Amazonia where 
all members of a community are fond of their personal 
autonomy and notably allergic to any obvious expression of 
control or coercion. The conception of political power as a 
coercive force, while it may be a Western fixation, is not a 
universal. It is very unusual for an Amazonian leader to give 
an order. If many peoples do not view political power as a 
coercive force, nor as the most valued domain, then the leap 
from ‘the political’ to ‘domination’ (as coercion), and from 
there to ‘domination of women’, is a shaky one. As Marilyn 
Strathern has remarked, the notions of ‘the political’ and 
‘political personhood’ are cultural obsessions of our own, a 
bias long reflected in anthropological constructs.
* coercion: 강제
** autonomy: 자율
*** anthropological: 인류학의
󰀻
It is 
(A)
 to understand political power in other 
cultures through our own notion of it because ideas of 
political power are not 
(B)
 across cultures.
(A)
(B)
(A)
(B)
① rational
…flexible
② appropriate
…commonplace
③ misguided …uniform
④ unreasonable …varied
⑤ effective
…objective
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
홀수형
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Our irresistible tendency to see things in human terms ―
that we are often mistaken in attributing complex human 
motives and processing abilities to other species ― does not 
mean that an animal’s behavior is not, in fact, complex. 
Rather, it means that the complexity of the animal’s behavior 
is not purely a (a) product of its internal complexity. Herbert 
Simon’s “parable of the ant” makes this point very clearly. 
Imagine an ant walking along a beach, and (b) visualize 
tracking the trajectory of the ant as it moves. The trajectory 
would show a lot of twists and turns, and would be very 
irregular and complicated. One could then suppose that the ant 
had equally complicated (c) internal navigational abilities, 
and work out what these were likely to be by analyzing the 
trajectory to infer the rules and mechanisms that could produce 
such a complex navigational path. The complexity of the 
trajectory, however, “is really a complexity in the surface of 
the beach, not a complexity in the ant.” In reality, the ant may 
be using a set of very (d) complex rules: it is the interaction 
of these rules with the environment that actually produces the 
complex trajectory, not the ant alone. Put more generally, the 
parable of the ant illustrates that there is no necessary 
correlation between the complexity of an (e) observed behavior 
and the complexity of the mechanism that produces it.
* parable: 우화
** trajectory: 이동 경로
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Open the Mysterious Door to Environmental Complexity!
② Peaceful Coexistence of Human Beings and Animals
③ What Makes the Complexity of Animal Behavior?
④ Animals’ Dilemma: Finding Their Way in a Human World
⑤ Environmental Influences on Human Behavior Complexity
42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 
것은? [3점]
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e) 
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
In this area, heavy snow in winter was not uncommon. 
Sometimes it poured down for hours and hours and piled up 
very high. Then, no one could go out. Today too, because of 
the heavy snow, Mom was doing her office work at the 
kitchen table. Felix, the high schooler, had to take online 
classes in his room. Five-year-old Sean, who normally went 
to kindergarten, was sneaking around in the house playing 
home policeman. (a) The kindergartener wanted to know 
what his family members were up to, and was checking up on 
everyone.
* sneak: 몰래 움직이다
(B)
“All right. I’m sure you’re doing your work.” Mom replied, 
and then sharply added a question. “Sean, what are you 
doing?” Sean’s face immediately became blank, and he said, 
“Nothing.” “Come here, Honey, and you can help me.” Sean 
ran to the kitchen right away. “What can I do for you, Mom?” 
His voice was high, and Felix could sense that his brother was 
excited. Felix was pleased to get rid of (b) the policeman, and 
now he could concentrate on the lesson, at least till Sean came 
back. 
(C)
While checking on his family, Sean interfered in their 
business as if it was his own. This time, (c) the playful and 
curious boy was interested in his brother Felix, who 
committed himself to studying no matter where he was. Sean 
secretly looked inside his brother’s room from the door, and 
shouted toward the kitchen where Mom was working, “Mom, 
Felix isn’t studying. He’s just watching a funny video.” Sean 
was naughtily smiling at his brother. 
* naughtily: 짓궂게
(D)
Felix was mad because (d) his little brother was bothering 
him. Felix was studying science using a video posted on the 
school web site. He made an angry face at the naughty boy. 
Right then, Mom asked loudly from the kitchen, “What are 
you doing, Felix?” Felix’s room was located next to the 
kitchen, and he could hear Mom clearly. “I’m watching a 
lecture video for my science class.” Felix argued against 
Sean’s accusation and mischievously stuck (e) his tongue out 
at his little brother.
* mischievously: 장난기 있게
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)
② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
것은?
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 엄마는 폭설로 인해 집에서 업무를 보고 있었다.
② Sean은 엄마가 불러서 주방으로 달려갔다.
③ Sean은 몰래 형의 방을 들여다보았다.
④ Felix는 자신의 방에서 게임을 하고 있었다.
⑤ Felix의 방은 주방 옆에 있었다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
