1
8
  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
① 등교 시간 변경을 알리려고
② 학교 매점의 영업 재개를 안내하려고
③ 체육관 신축 공사 일정을 예고하려고
④ 교실 의자와 책상 교체 계획을 공지하려고
⑤ 학교 급식 만족도 조사 참여를 독려하려고
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 등산 전에는 과식을 삼가는 것이 좋다.
② 야생동물에게 먹이를 주지 말아야 한다.
③ 야외 활동은 가족 간의 유대를 돈독히 한다.
④ 산에서 야생동물을 만났을 때는 침착해야 된다.
⑤ 반려동물을 키우는 것은 정서 안정에 도움이 된다.
3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 스타일리스트 － 기상 캐스터
② 연출가 － 극작가
③ 매니저 － 뮤지컬 배우
④ 해군 장교 － 항해사
⑤ 디자이너 － 신문 기자
4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 
고르시오.
5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 프로젝터와 스크린 챙기기
② 담요 가져오기
③ 영화 선택하기
④ 접이식 의자 구매하기
⑤ 짐을 차에 싣기
6. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $126
② $130
③ $140
④ $144
⑤ $150
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 송별회 장소를 변경한 이유를 고르시오.
① 참석 인원에 변경 사항이 생겨서
② 예약한 레스토랑의 평이 안 좋아서
③ 모임 장소로 가는 교통편이 불편해서
④ 송별회 주인공이 다른 메뉴를 원해서
⑤ 해산물 알레르기가 있는 동료들이 있어서
8. 대화를 듣고, Run with Your Dog 행사에 관해 언급되지 않은 
것을 고르시오.
① 목적
② 날짜
③ 복장
④ 장소
⑤ 참가비
9. Bluemont Salt Mine의 특별 행사에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 
일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 10월 10일부터 10월 16일까지 진행된다.
② 가장 깊은 구역에 입장이 허용된다.
③ 사진 촬영이 가능하다.
④ 입장료는 무료이다.
⑤ 방문객들에게 선물을 준다.
10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 주문할 크레용 
세트를 고르시오.
Crayon Sets
Set
Number of 
Crayons
Price
Washable
Free Gift
①
A
24
$9
☓
coloring book
②
B
24
$11
◯
sharpener
③
C
36
$15
☓
sharpener
④
D
36
$17
◯
coloring book
⑤
E
48
$21
◯
coloring book
11. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I think so. I should be fine by then.
② I’m sorry. I forgot to bring my racket.
③ Of course. Keep me posted on his recovery.
④ I’m afraid not. The doctor’s schedule is full today.
⑤ Good idea. Let’s watch the tennis match at my house.
12. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① I remember where I left my uniform.
② We can’t participate in P.E. class now.
③ You should hurry before the cafeteria closes.
④ You can leave it with me and I’ll find the owner.
⑤ I hope someone will bring it with your belongings.
2021학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2
8
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman:
① I’ll give it a try. What time shall we meet?
② Not yet. We need to wait for the food to be ready.
③ I don’t know. Do you want me to send the recipe?
④ Absolutely. I’ll stress the importance of education.
⑤ Cheer up. We can relax after our homework is done.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
  
   
① Not now. It’ll be easier to park there late at night.
② Sounds good. I’m glad to hear that you’ll arrive soon.
③ Sure. I’ll check the app for a spot and make a reservation.
④ One moment. The kids should be back from the museum.
⑤ No problem. I’ll remove the app for the children’s safety.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jane이 Andrew에게 할 말로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Jane:
  
   
① Make sure everybody is prepared for next week.
② I think you should wear this jacket for the festival.
③ Thank you for keeping all your things in perfect shape.
④ How about choosing just the items that are in a good state?
⑤ Why don’t you buy secondhand items instead of new ones?
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① positive effects of plants on insects
② benefits of insects to human beings
③ various methods of insect reproduction
④ relationship between diseases and insects
⑤ ways to prevent insects from damaging crops
17. 언급된 곤충이 아닌 것은?
① honeybees
② grasshoppers
③ silkworms
④ fruit flies
⑤ ladybugs
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Mr. Anderson:
My name is Sophia Willis, Events Manager of the 2020 
Caroline County Art Contest. I am currently looking for a place 
for this year’s contest exhibition. The Caroline County Art 
Contest has had over one hundred artworks submitted to us by 
local artists. For the theme, we wanted artists to explore the 
natural world of Caroline County. I believe the Garden Café 
Gallery would be a perfect place to host the event, as your 
gallery is well-known for its beautiful garden. The exhibition 
is usually held throughout October, and we very much hope 
that we can rent a space for the exhibition at the Garden Café 
Gallery during this time. I look forward to your response. 
Yours sincerely,
Sophia Willis
① 출품 작품 전시회에 초대하려고
② 작품 제출 방법의 변경을 안내하려고
③ 출품 작품 전시 장소 대여를 문의하려고
④ 정원 박람회의 변경된 일정을 공지하려고
⑤ 지역 예술가들에게 작품 제출을 독려하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Annette의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
The day of the Five Mile Fun Walk had arrived. Annette had 
been waiting for Reiner at the registration point for over an hour. 
There was still no sign of him. She started thinking that 
something bad might have happened to him. Getting concerned, 
she tried calling Reiner’s phone again, but there was no 
response. At that moment, she heard a voice calling her name. 
She found Reiner coming toward her. “Thank goodness! What 
happened?” she asked. He explained that the traffic had been 
terrible. What was worse, he had left his phone at home. “I’m so 
sorry,” he said. She started to relax. “I’m fine now. As long as 
you’re here and safe. Why don’t we go and register?” They 
headed into the event together.
① worried → relieved
② confident → nervous
③ calm
→ upset
④ regretful
→ grateful
⑤ bored
→ amazed
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Given the right conditions, entrepreneurship can be fully 
woven into the fabric of campus life, greatly expanding its 
educational reach. One study showed that, within the workplace, 
peers influence each other to spot opportunities and act on 
them: the more entrepreneurs you have working together in an 
office, the more likely their colleagues will catch the bug. A 
study of Stanford University alumni found that those “who 
have varied work and educational backgrounds are much more 
likely to start their own businesses than those who have 
focused on one role at work or concentrated in one subject at 
school.” To cultivate an entrepreneurial culture, colleges and 
universities need to offer students a broad choice of experiences 
and wide exposure to different ideas. They are uniquely 
positioned to do this by combining the resources of academic 
programming, residential life, student groups, and alumni 
networks. 
* entrepreneur: 기업가  ** alumni: 졸업생
① 훌륭한 기업가가 되기 위해서 관심 있는 한 분야에 집중해야 한다.
② 대학은 학생들이 기업가 정신을 함양하도록 환경을 조성해야 한다.
③ 좋은 직장을 얻기 위해서 학업과 대외 활동에 충실해야 한다. 
④ 기업은 대학생들의 다양한 소모임 활동을 적극 지원해야 한다. 
⑤ 대학생은 학업 성취를 위하여 경험과 생각의 폭을 넓혀야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
21. 밑줄 친 don’t knock the box가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 
가장 적절한 것은?
By expecting what’s likely to happen next, you prepare for 
the few most likely scenarios so that you don’t have to figure 
things out while they’re happening. It’s therefore not a surprise 
when a restaurant server offers you a menu. When she brings 
you a glass with a clear fluid in it, you don’t have to ask if it’s 
water. After you eat, you don’t have to figure out why you 
aren’t hungry anymore. All these things are expected and are 
therefore not problems to solve. Furthermore, imagine how 
demanding it would be to always consider all the possible uses 
for all the familiar objects with which you interact. Should I 
use my hammer or my telephone to pound in that nail? On a 
daily basis, functional fixedness is a relief, not a curse. That’s 
why you shouldn’t even attempt to consider all your options 
and possibilities. You can’t. If you tried to, then you’d never 
get anything done. So don’t knock the box. Ironically, although 
it limits your thinking, it also makes you smart. It helps you to 
stay one step ahead of reality.
① Deal with a matter based on your habitual expectations.
② Question what you expect from a familiar object.
③ Replace predetermined routines with fresh ones.
④ Think over all possible outcomes of a given situation.
⑤ Extend all the boundaries that guide your thinking to insight.
22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Music is a human art form, an inseparable part of the human 
experience everywhere in the world. Music is social, and tightly 
woven into the tapestry of life, and young children are very much 
a part of this multifaceted fabric. The musical experiences they 
have provide opportunities for them to know language, 
behaviors, customs, traditions, beliefs, values, stories, and other 
cultural nuances. As they become musically skilled through 
experiences in song and instrumental music, young children can 
also grow cultural knowledge and sensitivity. Music is an 
extremely important aspect of culture, shaping and transmitting 
the above-mentioned aspects that characterize groups of people. 
Exposing young children to the world’s musical cultures brings 
them into the cultural conversation, allowing them to learn about 
self and others in an artistically meaningful and engaging way. 
Prior to the development of social biases and cultural preferences 
that all too easily turn into prejudices, the opportunity to know 
people through song, dance, and instrument play is a gift to all 
who work for the well-balanced development of young children 
into the responsible citizens they will one day become.
* tapestry: 색색의 실로 수놓은 장식 걸개  ** multifaceted: 다면의
① 아이들의 균형 잡힌 성장을 위해서는 다양한 경험이 중요하다.
② 사회적 편견과 문화적 선호도는 서로 밀접하게 관련되어 있다.
③ 어린 나이에 다양한 음악에 노출되면 예술적 감각이 향상된다.
④ 음악을 포함한 예술은 특정 문화에 대한 당대의 사회적 시각을 반영한다. 
⑤ 음악은 아이들을 사회･문화적으로 균형 잡힌 시민으로 성장하게 해 준다.
23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Conventional wisdom in the West, influenced by philosophers 
from Plato to Descartes, credits individuals and especially 
geniuses with creativity and originality. Social and cultural 
influences and causes are minimized, ignored, or eliminated 
from consideration at all. Thoughts, original and conventional, 
are identified with individuals, and the special things that 
individuals are and do are traced to their genes and their brains. 
The “trick” here is to recognize that individual humans are social 
constructions themselves, embodying and reflecting the variety 
of social and cultural influences they have been exposed to 
during their lives. Our individuality is not denied, but it is viewed 
as a product of specific social and cultural experiences. The brain 
itself is a social thing, influenced structurally and at the level 
of its connectivities by social environments. The “individual” 
is a legal, religious, and political fiction just as the “I” is a 
grammatical illusion. 
① recognition of the social nature inherent in individuality
② ways of filling the gap between individuality and collectivity
③ issues with separating original thoughts from conventional ones
④ acknowledgment of the true individuality embodied in human genes
⑤ necessity of shifting from individualism to interdependence
24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
The discovery that man’s knowledge is not, and never has 
been, perfectly accurate has had a humbling and perhaps a 
calming effect upon the soul of modern man. The nineteenth 
century, as we have observed, was the last to believe that the 
world, as a whole as well as in its parts, could ever be 
perfectly known. We realize now that this is, and always was, 
impossible. We know within limits, not absolutely, even if the 
limits can usually be adjusted to satisfy our needs. Curiously, 
from this new level of uncertainty even greater goals emerge 
and appear to be attainable. Even if we cannot know the world 
with absolute precision, we can still control it. Even our 
inherently incomplete knowledge seems to work as powerfully 
as ever. In short, we may never know precisely how high is the 
highest mountain, but we continue to be certain that we can 
get to the top nevertheless.
① Summits Yet to Be Reached: An Onward Journey to Knowledge
② Over the Mountain: A Single But Giant Step to Success
③ Integrating Parts into a Whole: The Road to Perfection
④ How to Live Together in an Age of Uncertainty
⑤ The Two Faces of a Knowledge-Based Society
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Top 7 Asia-Pacific Destinations (2018)
Rank
Destination
International
Overnight
Arrivals
(million)
Average
Spend 
per Day
(USD)
1
Bangkok
22.8
$184
2
Singapore
14.7
$272
3
Kuala Lumpur
13.8
$142
4
Tokyo
12.9
$196
5
Seoul
11.3
$155
6
Osaka
10.1
$223
7
Phuket
9.9
$247
The table above shows the top seven destination cities in the 
Asia-Pacific region in 2018 by international overnight arrivals, 
with additional information on the average spend per day in those 
cities. ① Bangkok was the top destination in the Asia-Pacific 
region with 22.8 million international overnight arrivals, 
immediately followed by Singapore with 14.7 million 
international overnight arrivals. ② Kuala Lumpur was ranked in 
third place based on the number of international overnight 
arrivals, and the average spend per day in this city was more than 
$150. ③ Tokyo was ranked in fourth place for the number of 
international overnight arrivals, and the average spend per day in 
this city was $196. ④ The number of international overnight 
arrivals in Seoul was larger than that of Osaka. ⑤ Phuket was the 
only city where the number of international overnight arrivals was 
less than 10 million, and the average spend per day in this city was 
$247.
26. Marc Isambard Brunel에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 
않는 것은?
Marc Isambard Brunel (1769—1849) is best known for the 
design and construction of the Thames Tunnel. Originally 
born in France, Brunel escaped to the United States during the 
French Revolution. He later moved to London. When the 
Napoleonic Wars were at their height, he invented machines 
for making boots. During the Napoleonic Wars, Brunel’s 
factory supplied British troops with boots. After the Wars 
ended, however, the government stopped buying his boots and 
he went out of business. A few years later, Brunel was 
imprisoned for several months because of his debt. At that 
time, London was very much divided by the River Thames 
and needed more ways for people and goods to move across it. 
In 1825, Brunel designed a tunnel under the river. The Thames 
Tunnel officially opened on 25 March 1843, and Brunel, 
despite being in ill health, attended the opening ceremony.
① 프랑스 혁명 중에 미국으로 달아났다.
② 부츠를 만드는 기계를 발명하였다.
③ 그의 공장은 영국 군대에 부츠를 공급한 적이 있다.
④ 빚 때문에 감옥에 수감되었다.
⑤ Thames Tunnel 개통식에 아파서 참석하지 못했다.
27. Springfield Science Invention Contest에 관한 다음 안내문의 
내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 매년 개최되는 대회이다.
② 심사 기준은 발명품의 창의성과 유용성이다.
③ 발명품은 한 팀당 두 개까지 제출할 수 있다.
④ 1등은 50달러 상품권을 받는다.
⑤ 발명품은 과학 실험실로 제출해야 한다.
28. Poetry Writing Basics Workshop에 관한 다음 안내문의 
내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 목요일 오전에 진행된다.
② 학생회관 3층에서 열린다.
③ 참가자는 자신이 창작한 시를 낭독할 것이다.
④ 9월 18일까지는 등록비가 10달러이다.
⑤ 관련 문의는 이메일로 할 수 없다.
Springfield Science Invention Contest
Springfield High School invites all students to participate 
in the Springfield Science Invention Contest. In this annual 
contest, you have the opportunity to invent a useful object and 
show your creativity!
Details
∙Judging criteria are creativity and usefulness of the invention.
∙Participants must enter in teams of four and can only join 
one team.
∙Submission is limited to one invention per team.
Prizes
∙1st Place ― $50 gift certificate
∙2nd Place ― $30 gift certificate
∙3rd Place ― $10 gift certificate
Note
∙Inventions must be submitted to the science lab by October 1, 2020.
For more information, visit www.hsspringfield.edu.
Poetry Writing Basics Workshop
Join our Poetry Writing Basics Workshop and meet the 
poet, Ms. Grace Larson!
All students of George Clarkson University are invited.
When: Thursday, September 24, 2020 (1:00 p.m. — 4:00 p.m.)
Where: Main Seminar Room, 1st Floor, Student Union
After an introduction to the basic techniques of poetry writing, 
you will: 
1. Write your own poem.
2. Read it aloud to the other participants.
3. Receive expert feedback from Ms. Larson.
Registration Fee: $10
※ Register on or before September 18 and pay only $7.
Any related inquiries should be sent via email to 
studentun@georgeclarkson.edu.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
Competitive activities can be more than just performance 
showcases ① which the best is recognized and the rest are 
overlooked. The provision of timely, constructive feedback to 
participants on performance ②is an asset that some competitions 
and contests offer. In a sense, all competitions give feedback. 
For many, this is restricted to information about whether the 
participant is an award- or prizewinner. The provision of that 
type of feedback can be interpreted as shifting the emphasis to 
demonstrating superior performance but not ③ necessarily 
excellence. The best competitions promote excellence, not just 
winning or “beating” others. The emphasis on superiority is 
what we typically see as ④ fostering a detrimental effect of 
competition. Performance feedback requires that the program 
go beyond the “win, place, or show” level of feedback. 
Information about performance can be very helpful, not only 
to the participant who does not win or place but also to those 
who ⑤ do.
* foster: 조장하다  ** detrimental: 유해한
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
않은 것은?
If I say to you, ‘Don’t think of a white bear’, you will find it 
difficult not to think of a white bear. In this way, ‘thought 
suppression can actually increase the thoughts one wishes to 
suppress instead of calming them’. One common example of 
this is that people on a diet who try not to think about food 
often begin to think much ① more about food. This process is 
therefore also known as the rebound effect. The ② ironic 
effect seems to be caused by the interplay of two related 
cognitive processes. This dual-process system involves, first, 
an intentional operating process, which consciously attempts to 
locate thoughts ③ unrelated to the suppressed ones. Second, 
and simultaneously, an unconscious monitoring process tests 
whether the operating system is functioning effectively. If the 
monitoring system encounters thoughts inconsistent with the 
intended ones, it prompts the intentional operating process to 
ensure that these are replaced by ④ inappropriate thoughts. 
However, it is argued, the intentional operating system can fail 
due to increased cognitive load caused by fatigue, stress and 
emotional factors, and so the monitoring process filters the 
inappropriate thoughts into consciousness, making them 
highly ⑤ accessible.
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. “What’s in a name? That which we call a rose, by any other 
name would smell as sweet.” This thought of Shakespeare’s 
points up a difference between roses and, say, paintings. 
Natural objects, such as roses, are not
. They are 
not taken as vehicles of meanings and messages. They belong 
to no tradition, strictly speaking have no style, and are not 
understood within a framework of culture and convention. 
Rather, they are sensed and savored relatively directly, without 
intellectual mediation, and so what they are called, either 
individually or collectively, has little bearing on our experience 
of them. What a work of art is titled, on the other hand, has a 
significant effect on the aesthetic face it presents and on the 
qualities we correctly perceive in it. A painting of a rose, by a 
name other than the one it has, might very well smell different, 
aesthetically speaking. The painting titled Rose of Summer and 
an indiscernible painting titled Vermillion Womanhood are 
physically, but also semantically and aesthetically, distinct 
objects of art.
* savor: 음미하다  ** indiscernible: 식별하기 어려운
*** semantically: 의미적으로
① changed
② classified
③ preserved
④ controlled
⑤ interpreted
32. Genetic engineering followed by cloning to distribute many 
identical animals or plants is sometimes seen as a threat to the 
diversity of nature. However, humans have been replacing 
diverse natural habitats with artificial monoculture for millennia. 
Most natural habitats in the advanced nations have already been 
replaced with some form of artificial environment based on mass 
production or repetition. The real threat to biodiversity is surely 
the need to convert ever more of our planet into production 
zones to feed the ever-increasing human population. The cloning 
and transgenic alteration of domestic animals makes little 
difference to the overall situation. Conversely, the renewed 
interest in genetics has led to a growing awareness that there 
are many wild plants and animals with interesting or useful 
genetic properties that could be used for a variety of 
as-yet-unknown purposes. This has led in turn to a realization 
that
     
because they may harbor tomorrow’s drugs against cancer, 
malaria, or obesity.
* monoculture: 단일 경작
① ecological systems are genetically programmed
② we should avoid destroying natural ecosystems
③ we need to stop creating genetically modified organisms
④ artificial organisms can survive in natural environments
⑤ living things adapt themselves to their physical environments
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. Since human beings are at once both similar and different, they 
should be treated equally because of both. Such a view, which 
grounds equality not in human uniformity but in the interplay of 
uniformity and difference, builds difference into the very concept 
of equality, breaks the traditional equation of equality with 
similarity, and is immune to monist distortion. Once the basis of 
equality changes so does its content. Equality involves equal 
freedom or opportunity to be different, and treating human beings 
equally requires us to take into account both their similarities and 
differences. When the latter are not relevant, equality entails 
uniform or identical treatment; when they are, it requires 
differential treatment. Equal rights do not mean identical rights, 
for individuals with different cultural backgrounds and needs 
might
in respect of whatever happens to be the content of their rights. 
Equality involves not just rejection of irrelevant differences as is 
commonly argued, but also full recognition of legitimate and 
relevant ones. [3점]
* monist: 일원론의  ** entail: 내포하다
① require different rights to enjoy equality
② abandon their own freedom for equality
③ welcome the identical perception of inequality
④ accept their place in the social structure more easily
⑤ reject relevant differences to gain full understanding
34. Protopia is a state of becoming, rather than a destination. It 
is a process. In the protopian mode, things are better today 
than they were yesterday, although only a little better. It is 
incremental improvement or mild progress. The “pro” in 
protopian stems from the notions of process and progress. This 
subtle progress is not dramatic, not exciting. It is easy to miss 
because a protopia generates almost as many new problems as 
new benefits. The problems of today were caused by 
yesterday’s technological successes, and the technological 
solutions to today’s problems will cause the problems of 
tomorrow. This circular expansion of both problems and 
solutions
. 
Ever since the Enlightenment and the invention of science, 
we’ve managed to create a tiny bit more than we’ve destroyed 
each year. But that few percent positive difference is 
compounded over decades into what we might call civilization. 
Its benefits never star in movies. [3점]
* incremental: 증가의  ** compound: 조합하다
① conceals the limits of innovations at the present time
② makes it difficult to predict the future with confidence
③ motivates us to quickly achieve a protopian civilization 
④ hides a steady accumulation of small net benefits over time
⑤ produces a considerable change in technological successes
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
In a highly commercialized setting such as the United 
States, it is not surprising that many landscapes are seen as 
commodities. In other words, they are valued because of their 
market potential. Residents develop an identity in part based 
on how the landscape can generate income for the community.
① This process involves more than the conversion of the 
natural elements into commodities. ② The landscape itself, 
including the people and their sense of self, takes on the form 
of a commodity. ③ Landscape protection in the US traditionally 
focuses on protecting areas of wilderness, typically in 
mountainous regions. ④ Over time, the landscape identity can 
evolve into a sort of “logo” that can be used to sell the stories 
of the landscape. ⑤ Thus, California’s “Wine Country,” 
Florida’s “Sun Coast,” or South Dakota’s “Badlands” shape 
how both outsiders and residents perceive a place, and these 
labels build a set of expectations associated with the culture of 
those who live there.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
In the fifth century B.C.E., the Greek philosopher 
Protagoras pronounced, “Man is the measure of all things.” 
In other words, we feel entitled to ask the world, “What 
good are you?”
(A) Abilities 
said 
to 
“make 
us 
human” ― empathy, 
communication, grief, toolmaking, and so on ― all exist to 
varying degrees among other minds sharing the world with 
us. Animals with backbones (fishes, amphibians, reptiles, 
birds, and mammals) all share the same basic skeleton, 
organs, nervous systems, hormones, and behaviors.
(B) We assume that we are the world’s standard, that all things 
should be compared to us. Such an assumption makes us 
overlook a lot.
(C) Just as different models of automobiles each have an 
engine, drive train, four wheels, doors, and seats, we 
differ mainly in terms of our outside contours and a few 
internal tweaks. But like naive car buyers, most people 
see only animals’ varied exteriors.
* contour: 윤곽, 외형  ** tweak: 조정, 개조
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
It can be difficult to decide the place of fine art, such as 
oil paintings, watercolours, sketches or sculptures, in an 
archival institution. 
(A) The best archival decisions about art do not focus on 
territoriality (this object belongs in my institution even 
though I do not have the resources to care for it) or on 
questions of monetary value or prestige (this object raises 
the cultural standing of my institution). The best decisions 
focus on what evidential value exists and what is best for 
the item.
(B) But art can also carry aesthetic value, which elevates the 
job of evaluation into another realm. Aesthetic value and 
the notion of artistic beauty are important considerations, 
but they are not what motivates archival preservation in 
the first instance.
(C) Art can serve as documentary evidence, especially when 
the items were produced before photography became 
common. Sketches of soldiers on a battlefield, paintings of 
English country villages or portraits of Dutch townspeople 
can provide the only visual evidence of a long-ago place, 
person or time. [3점]
* archival: 기록(보관소)의  ** prestige: 명성, 위신
*** realm: 영역
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
As long as you do not run out of copies before completing 
this process, you will know that you have a sufficient 
number to go around.
 
We sometimes solve number problems almost without 
realizing it. ( ① ) For example, suppose you are conducting 
a meeting and you want to ensure that everyone there has a 
copy of the agenda. ( ② ) You can deal with this by labelling 
each copy of the handout in turn with the initials of each of 
those present. ( ③ ) You have then solved this problem 
without resorting to arithmetic and without explicit counting. 
( ④ ) There are numbers at work for us here all the same and 
they allow precise comparison of one collection with another, 
even though the members that make up the collections could 
have entirely different characters, as is the case here, where 
one set is a collection of people, while the other consists of 
pieces of paper. ( ⑤ ) What numbers allow us to do is to 
compare the relative size of one set with another.
* arithmetic: 산수
39.
Rather, it evolved naturally as certain devices were found 
in practice to be both workable and useful. 
Film has no grammar. ( ① ) There are, however, some 
vaguely defined rules of usage in cinematic language, and the 
syntax of film ― its systematic arrangement ― orders these 
rules and indicates relationships among them. ( ② ) As with 
written and spoken languages, it is important to remember 
that the syntax of film is a result of its usage, not a 
determinant of it. ( ③ ) There is nothing preordained about 
film syntax. ( ④ ) Like the syntax of written and spoken 
language, the syntax of film is an organic development, 
descriptive rather than prescriptive, and it has changed 
considerably over the years. ( ⑤ ) “Hollywood Grammar” 
may sound laughable now, but during the thirties, forties, and 
early fifties it was an accurate model of the way Hollywood 
films were constructed. [3점]
* preordained: 미리 정해진
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), 
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Research from the Harwood Institute for Public Innovation 
in the USA shows that people feel that ‘materialism’ 
somehow comes between them and the satisfaction of their 
social needs. A report entitled Yearning for Balance, based 
on a nationwide survey of Americans, concluded that they 
were ‘deeply ambivalent about wealth and material gain’. A 
large majority of people wanted society to ‘move away 
from greed and excess toward a way of life more centred on 
values, community, and family’. But they also felt that 
these priorities were not shared by most of their fellow 
Americans, who, they believed, had become ‘increasingly 
atomized, selfish, and irresponsible’. As a result they often 
felt isolated. However, the report says, that when brought 
together in focus groups to discuss these issues, people 
were ‘surprised and excited to find that others share[d] their 
views’. Rather than uniting us with others in a common 
cause, the unease we feel about the loss of social values and 
the way we are drawn into the pursuit of material gain is 
often experienced as if it were a purely private ambivalence 
which cuts us off from others.
* ambivalent: 양면 가치의
󰀻
Many Americans, believing that materialism keeps them 
from
(A)
social values, feel detached from most 
others, but this is actually a fairly
(B)
concern.
(A)
(B)
(A)
(B)
① pursuing …… unnecessary
② pursuing …… common
③ holding …… personal
④ denying …… ethical
⑤ denying …… primary
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
To the extent that sufficient context has been provided, the 
reader can come to a well-crafted text with no expert knowledge 
and come away with a good approximation of what has been 
intended by the author. The text has become a public document 
and the reader can read it with a (a) minimum of effort and 
struggle; his experience comes close to what Freud has 
described as the deployment of “evenly-hovering attention.” 
He puts himself in the author’s hands (some have had this 
experience with great novelists such as Dickens or Tolstoy) and 
he (b) follows where the author leads. The real world has 
vanished and the fictive world has taken its place. Now consider 
the other extreme. When we come to a badly crafted text in 
which context and content are not happily joined, we must 
struggle to understand, and our sense of what the author 
intended probably bears (c) close correspondence to his 
original intention. An out-of-date translation will give us this 
experience; as we read, we must bring the language up to date, 
and understanding comes only at the price of a fairly intense 
struggle with the text. Badly presented content with no frame of 
reference can provide (d) the same experience; we see the 
words but have no sense of how they are to be taken. The author 
who fails to provide the context has (e) mistakenly assumed 
that his picture of the world is shared by all his readers and fails 
to realize that supplying the right frame of reference is a critical 
part of the task of writing.
* deployment: (전략적) 배치
** evenly-hovering attention: 고르게 주의를 기울이는 것
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Building a Wall Between Reality and the Fictive World
② Creative Reading: Going Beyond the Writer’s Intentions
③ Usefulness of Readers’ Experiences for Effective Writing
④ Context in Writing: A Lighthouse for Understanding Texts
⑤ Trapped in Their Own Words: The Narrow Outlook of Authors
42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 
것은? [3점]
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e) 
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
The children arrived at sunrise at their grandmother’s 
house. They always gathered at this time of year to assist 
with her corn harvest. In return, their grandmother would 
reward them with a present and by cooking a delicious feast. 
The children were all in great spirits. But not Sally. She 
disliked working in the corn field as she hated the heat and 
the dust. (a) She sat silently as the others took a sack each 
and then sang their way to the field.
(B)
Sally just wanted to get her present and leave the field 
because she was starting to get hot and feel irritated. (b) She 
had only filled her sack twice, but the others were now taking 
their third sacks to the granary. Sally sighed heavily. Then an 
idea struck her. To make the sack lighter and speed things up, 
she quickly filled her last sack with corn stalks. Sally reached 
the granary first, and her grandmother asked (c) her to put 
aside the final load and write her name on it.
* granary: 곡물창고  ** stalk: 줄기
(C)
They reached the field and started to work happily. Soon 
after, Sally joined them with her sack. Around mid-morning, 
their grandmother came with ice-cold lemonade and peach 
pie. After finishing, the children continued working until the 
sun was high and their sacks were bursting. Each child had to 
make three trips to the granary. Grandmother was impressed 
by their efforts and (d) she wanted to give them presents 
accordingly.
(D)
Grandmother asked the other children to do the same thing. 
Then, all of the children enjoyed their grandmother’s delicious 
lunch. “I am so pleased with your work,” she told them after 
lunch. “This year, you can all take home your final load as a 
present!” The children cheered for joy, gladly thanked her, and 
lifted their sacks to take home. Sally was terribly disappointed. 
There was nothing but useless corn stalks in (e) her sack. She 
then made the long walk home, pretending that she was 
carrying a heavy load.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)
② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
것은?
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① 아이들은 할머니의 옥수수 수확을 돕기 위해 모였다.
② Sally는 덥고 짜증나서 옥수수 밭을 떠나고 싶었다.
③ 아이들은 각자 세 번씩 옥수수가 담긴 자루를 곡물창고로 날라야 했다.
④ 할머니는 아이들에게 맛있는 점심을 제공했다.
⑤ Sally는 옥수수가 담긴 무거운 자루를 가지고 집으로 갔다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
