1
8
  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
① 조련사 자격증 취득 방법을 설명하려고
② 동물 병원 확장 이전을 공지하려고
③ 새로 출시된 개 사료를 소개하려고
④ 반려동물 입양 절차를 안내하려고
⑤ 개 훈련 센터를 홍보하려고
2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 여행 전에 합리적으로 예산을 계획해야 한다.
② 여행 가서 할 것을 너무 많이 계획하면 안 된다.
③ 인생에서 자신의 원칙을 고수하는 것이 중요하다.
④ 여행은 사고의 폭을 확장시켜 사람을 성장하게 한다.
⑤ 보호자 없이 학생끼리 여행하는 것은 안전하지 않다.
3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 라디오 쇼 진행자 － 제빵사
② 리포터 － 과수원 주인
③ 광고주 － 요리사
④ 방송 작가 － 경제학자
⑤ 유통업자 － 농부
4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 리본 가져오기
② 선글라스 주문하기
③ 사진사 섭외하기
④ 설문 조사 실시하기
⑤ 졸업 연설문 작성하기
6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $36
② $45
③ $50
④ $54
⑤ $60
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 탁구 연습을 할 수 없는 이유를 고르시오.
① 학교 도서관에 자원봉사를 하러 가야 해서
② 과학 퀴즈를 위한 공부를 해야 해서
③ 연극부 모임에 참가해야 해서
④ 역사 숙제를 제출해야 해서
⑤ 어깨에 통증이 있어서
8. 대화를 듣고, Little Readers’ Class에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 
고르시오.
① 장소
② 시간
③ 대상 연령
④ 모집 인원
⑤ 등록 방법
9. 2021 Family Science Festival에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 
일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 12월 7일부터 일주일 동안 진행된다.
② 8개의 프로그램이 제공될 것이다.
③ 어린이 과학 잡지를 판매할 것이다.
④ 11세 미만의 어린이들은 성인을 동반해야 한다.
⑤ 참가를 위해 미리 등록해야 한다.
10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 예약할 스터디 
룸을 고르시오.
Study Rooms
Room Capacity
(persons)
Available Times
Price
(per hour) Projector
①
A
2-3
9 a.m. — 11 a.m.
$10
☓
②
B
4-6
9 a.m. — 11 a.m.
$16
◯
③
C
4-6
2 p.m. — 4 p.m.
$14
☓
④
D
6-8
2 p.m. — 4 p.m.
$19
◯
⑤
E
6-9
4 p.m. — 6 p.m.
$21
☓
11. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Just give me about ten minutes.
② It took an hour for us to get back home.
③ I think you need to focus on your work.
④ It was nice of you to invite my co-workers.
⑤ Call me when you finish sending the email.
12. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Excellent. I like the camera you bought for me.
② Good. I’ll stop by and get it on my way home.
③ Never mind. I’ll drop off the camera tomorrow.
④ I see. Thanks for taking those pictures of me.
⑤ No way. That’s too expensive for the repair.
2022학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
1
제 3 교시
홀수형
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
홀수형
2
8
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① No worries. Stress is not always as bad as you think.
② Don’t forget to bring a charger whenever you go out.
③ Great. That’ll be a good way to take time for yourself.
④ I think working out too much will burn all your energy.
⑤ Fantastic. Let’s enjoy ourselves at the exhibition with the kids.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Please check it again. The hotel can’t be fully booked.
② Too bad. I should’ve checked out as early as possible.
③ Sure. I’m very satisfied with your cleaning service.
④ I’m sorry. You can’t switch your room with mine.
⑤ Perfect. That’s high enough to avoid the smell.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Jason이 Sarah에게 할 말로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Jason:
① Good luck. I hope you finish your work in time.
② Okay. Let’s meet to discuss the changes to the sculpture.
③ That’s terrible. I’m sorry that the reopening was postponed.
④ Hurry up. You have to send the final design immediately.
⑤ Don’t worry. I can get the job done before the deadline.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① effects of incorporating painting into math education
② mathematical analysis of the art industry’s growth
③ application of mathematics in different types of art
④ historical review of important concepts in the arts
⑤ challenges of harmonizing mathematics and art
17. 언급된 예술 분야가 아닌 것은?
① music
② painting
③ photography
④ dance
⑤ cinema
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Ms. Green,
My name is Donna Williams, a science teacher at Rogan 
High School. I am planning a special workshop for our science 
teachers. We are interested in learning how to teach online 
science classes. I have been impressed with your ideas about 
using internet platforms for science classes. Since you are an 
expert in online education, I would like to ask you to deliver 
a special lecture at the workshop scheduled for next month. 
I am sure the lecture will help our teachers manage successful 
online science classes, and I hope we can learn from your 
insights. I am looking forward to hearing from you.
Sincerely,
Donna Williams
① 과학 교육 정책 협의회 참여를 독려하려고
② 과학 교사 워크숍의 특강을 부탁하려고
③ 과학 교사 채용 계획을 공지하려고
④ 과학 교육 프로그램 개발을 요청하려고
⑤ 과학 교육 워크숍 일정의 변경을 안내하려고
19. 다음 글에 나타난 Evelyn의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
It was Evelyn’s first time to explore the Badlands of 
Alberta, famous across Canada for its numerous dinosaur 
fossils. As a young amateur bone-hunter, she was overflowing 
with anticipation. She had not travelled this far for the bones 
of common dinosaur species. Her life-long dream to find rare 
fossils of dinosaurs was about to come true. She began eagerly 
searching for them. After many hours of wandering throughout 
the deserted lands, however, she was unsuccessful. Now, the 
sun was beginning to set, and her goal was still far beyond her 
reach. Looking at the slowly darkening ground before her, she 
sighed to herself, “I can’t believe I came all this way for 
nothing. What a waste of time!”
① confused → scared
② discouraged → confident
③ relaxed
→ annoyed 
④ indifferent
→ depressed
⑤ hopeful
→ disappointed
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
One of the most common mistakes made by organizations 
when they first consider experimenting with social media is 
that they focus too much on social media tools and platforms 
and not enough on their business objectives. The reality of 
success in the social web for businesses is that creating a social 
media program begins not with insight into the latest social 
media tools and channels but with a thorough understanding of 
the organization’s own goals and objectives. A social media 
program is not merely the fulfillment of a vague need to manage 
a “presence” on popular social networks because “everyone 
else is doing it.” “Being in social media” serves no purpose 
in and of itself. In order to serve any purpose at all, a social 
media presence must either solve a problem for the organization 
and its customers or result in an improvement of some sort 
(preferably a measurable one). In all things, purpose drives 
success. The world of social media is no different.
① 기업 이미지에 부합하는 소셜 미디어를 직접 개발하여 운영해야 한다.
② 기업은 사회적 가치와 요구를 반영하여 사업 목표를 수립해야 한다.
③ 기업은 소셜 미디어를 활용할 때 사업 목표를 토대로 해야 한다.
④ 소셜 미디어로 제품을 홍보할 때는 구체적인 정보를 제공해야 한다.
⑤ 소비자의 의견을 수렴하기 위해 소셜 미디어를 적극 활용해야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형
3
3
8
21. 밑줄 친 whether to make ready for the morning commute 
or not이 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Scientists have no special purchase on moral or ethical 
decisions; a climate scientist is no more qualified to comment 
on health care reform than a physicist is to judge the causes of 
bee colony collapse. The very features that create expertise in a 
specialized domain lead to ignorance in many others. In some 
cases lay people ― farmers, fishermen, patients, native peoples ―
may have relevant experiences that scientists can learn from. 
Indeed, in recent years, scientists have begun to recognize this: 
the Arctic Climate Impact Assessment includes observations 
gathered from local native groups. So our trust needs to be 
limited, and focused. It needs to be very particular. Blind trust 
will get us into at least as much trouble as no trust at all. But 
without some degree of trust in our designated experts ― the 
men and women who have devoted their lives to sorting out 
tough questions about the natural world we live in ― we are 
paralyzed, in effect not knowing whether to make ready for 
the morning commute or not.
* lay: 전문가가 아닌 ** paralyze: 마비시키다 *** commute: 통근
① questionable facts that have been popularized by non-experts
② readily applicable information offered by specialized experts
③ common knowledge that hardly influences crucial decisions
④ practical information produced by both specialists and lay people
⑤ biased knowledge that is widespread in the local community
22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Environmental hazards include biological, physical, and 
chemical ones, along with the human behaviors that promote 
or allow exposure. Some environmental contaminants are 
difficult to avoid (the breathing of polluted air, the drinking of 
chemically contaminated public drinking water, noise in open 
public spaces); in these circumstances, exposure is largely 
involuntary. Reduction or elimination of these factors may require 
societal action, such as public awareness and public health 
measures. In many countries, the fact that some environmental 
hazards are difficult to avoid at the individual level is felt to be 
more morally egregious than those hazards that can be avoided. 
Having no choice but to drink water contaminated with very 
high levels of arsenic, or being forced to passively breathe in 
tobacco smoke in restaurants, outrages people more than the 
personal choice of whether an individual smokes tobacco. 
These factors are important when one considers how change 
(risk reduction) happens.
* contaminate: 오염시키다
** egregious: 매우 나쁜
① 개인이 피하기 어려운 유해 환경 요인에 대해서는 사회적 대응이 필요하다.
② 환경오염으로 인한 피해자들에게 적절한 보상을 하는 것이 바람직하다.
③ 다수의 건강을 해치는 행위에 대해 도덕적 비난 이상의 조치가 요구된다.
④ 환경오염 문제를 해결하기 위해서는 사후 대응보다 예방이 중요하다.
⑤ 대기오염 문제는 인접 국가들과의 긴밀한 협력을 통해 해결할 수 있다.
23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Scientists use paradigms rather than believing them. The use 
of a paradigm in research typically addresses related problems 
by employing shared concepts, symbolic expressions, 
experimental and mathematical tools and procedures, and even 
some of the same theoretical statements. Scientists need only 
understand how to use these various elements in ways that 
others would accept. These elements of shared practice thus 
need not presuppose any comparable unity in scientists’ beliefs 
about what they are doing when they use them. Indeed, one role 
of a paradigm is to enable scientists to work successfully 
without having to provide a detailed account of what they are 
doing or what they believe about it. Thomas Kuhn noted that 
scientists “can agree in their identification of a paradigm without 
agreeing on, or even attempting to produce, a full interpretation 
or rationalization of it. Lack of a standard interpretation or of 
an agreed reduction to rules will not prevent a paradigm from 
guiding research.”
① difficulty in drawing novel theories from existing paradigms
② significant influence of personal beliefs in scientific fields
③ key factors that promote the rise of innovative paradigms
④ roles of a paradigm in grouping like-minded researchers
⑤ functional aspects of a paradigm in scientific research
24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Mending and restoring objects often require even more 
creativity than original production. The preindustrial blacksmith 
made things to order for people in his immediate community; 
customizing the product, modifying or transforming it according 
to the user, was routine. Customers would bring things back if 
something went wrong; repair was thus an extension of 
fabrication. With industrialization and eventually with mass 
production, making things became the province of machine 
tenders with limited knowledge. But repair continued to require 
a larger grasp of design and materials, an understanding of the 
whole and a comprehension of the designer’s intentions. 
“Manufacturers all work by machinery or by vast subdivision 
of labour and not, so to speak, by hand,” an 1896 Manual of 
Mending and Repairing explained. “But all repairing must be 
done by hand. We can make every detail of a watch or of a 
gun by machinery, but the machine cannot mend it when 
broken, much less a clock or a pistol!”
① Still Left to the Modern Blacksmith: The Art of Repair
② A Historical Survey of How Repairing Skills Evolved
③ How to Be a Creative Repairperson: Tips and Ideas
④ A Process of Repair: Create, Modify, Transform!
⑤ Can Industrialization Mend Our Broken Past?
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
홀수형
4
8
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The above graphs show the percentage share of the global 
middle class by region in 2015 and its projected share in 
2025. ① It is projected that the share of the global middle 
class in Asia Pacific will increase from 46 percent in 2015 to 
60 percent in 2025. ② The projected share of Asia Pacific in 
2025, the largest among the six regions, is more than three 
times that of Europe in the same year. ③ The shares of 
Europe and North America are both projected to decrease, 
from 24 percent in 2015 to 16 percent in 2025 for Europe, and 
from 11 percent in 2015 to 8 percent in 2025 for North 
America. ④ Central and South America is not expected to 
change from 2015 to 2025 in its share of the global middle 
class. ⑤ In 2025, the share of the Middle East and North 
Africa will be larger than that of sub-Saharan Africa, as it was 
in 2015.
26. Donato Bramante에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 
것은?
Donato Bramante, born in Fermignano, Italy, began to paint 
early in his life. His father encouraged him to study painting. 
Later, he worked as an assistant of Piero della Francesca in 
Urbino. Around 1480, he built several churches in a new style 
in Milan. He had a close relationship with Leonardo da Vinci, 
and they worked together in that city. Architecture became his 
main interest, but he did not give up painting. Bramante 
moved to Rome in 1499 and participated in Pope Julius II’s 
plan for the renewal of Rome. He planned the new Basilica of 
St. Peter in Rome ― one of the most ambitious building projects 
in the history of humankind. Bramante died on April 11, 1514 
and was buried in Rome. His buildings influenced other 
architects for centuries.
① Piero della Francesca의 조수로 일했다.
② Milan에서 새로운 양식의 교회들을 건축했다.
③ 건축에 주된 관심을 갖게 되면서 그림 그리기를 포기했다.
④ Pope Julius II의 Rome 재개발 계획에 참여했다.
⑤ 그의 건축물들은 다른 건축가들에게 영향을 끼쳤다.
27. Cornhill No Paper Cup Challenge에 관한 다음 안내문의 
내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 참가자는 텀블러를 사용하는 자신의 동영상을 찍는다.
② 참가자가 동영상을 업로드할 곳은 학교 웹사이트이다.
③ 학생회장이 시작할 것이다.
④ 두 달 동안 진행될 예정이다.
⑤ 참가자 전원이 티셔츠를 받을 것이다.
28. Goldbeach SeaWorld Sleepovers에 관한 다음 안내문의 
내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 7세 이하의 어린이가 참가할 수 있다.
② 평일에 진행된다.
③ 참가비에 아침 식사가 포함된다.
④ 모든 활동은 야외에서 진행된다.
⑤ 사진 촬영은 언제든지 할 수 있다.
Cornhill No Paper Cup Challenge
Cornhill High School invites you to join the “No Paper 
Cup Challenge.” This encourages you to reduce your use of 
paper cups. Let’s save the earth together!
How to Participate
1) After being chosen, record a video showing you are 
using a tumbler.
2) Choose the next participant by saying his or her name 
in the video. 
3) Upload the video to our school website within 24 hours.
※ The student council president will start the challenge on 
December 1st, 2021.
Additional Information
∙The challenge will last for two weeks.
∙All participants will receive T-shirts.
If you have questions about the challenge, contact us at 
cornhillsc@chs.edu.
Goldbeach SeaWorld Sleepovers
Do your children love marine animals? A sleepover at 
Goldbeach SeaWorld will surely be an exciting overnight 
experience for them. Join us for a magical underwater 
sleepover.
Participants
󰠂 Children ages 8 to 12
󰠂 Children must be accompanied by a guardian.
When: Saturdays 5 p.m. to Sundays 10 a.m. in May, 2022
Activities: guided tour, underwater show, and photo session 
with a mermaid
Participation Fee
󰠂 $50 per person (dinner and breakfast included)
Note
󰠂 Sleeping bags and other personal items will not be 
provided.
󰠂 All activities take place indoors.
󰠂 Taking photos is not allowed from 10 p.m. to 7 a.m.
For more information, you can visit our website at 
www.goldbeachseaworld.com.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형
5
5
8
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
Like whole individuals, cells have a life span. During their life 
cycle (cell cycle), cell size, shape, and metabolic activities can 
change dramatically. A cell is “born” as a twin when its mother 
cell divides, ① producing two daughter cells. Each daughter 
cell is smaller than the mother cell, and except for unusual cases, 
each grows until it becomes as large as the mother cell ② was. 
During this time, the cell absorbs water, sugars, amino acids, 
and other nutrients and assembles them into new, living 
protoplasm. After the cell has grown to the proper size, its 
metabolism shifts as it either prepares to divide or matures and
③ differentiates into a specialized cell. Both growth and 
development require a complex and dynamic set of interactions 
involving all cell parts. ④ What cell metabolism and structure 
should be complex would not be surprising, but actually, they 
are rather simple and logical. Even the most complex cell has 
only a small number of parts, each ⑤ responsible for a distinct, 
well-defined aspect of cell life.
* metabolic: 물질대사의
** protoplasm: 원형질
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
않은 것은?
It has been suggested that “organic” methods, defined as 
those in which only natural products can be used as inputs, 
would be less damaging to the biosphere. Large-scale adoption 
of “organic” farming methods, however, would ① reduce 
yields and increase production costs for many major crops. 
Inorganic nitrogen supplies are ② essential for maintaining 
moderate to high levels of productivity for many of the 
non-leguminous crop species, because organic supplies of 
nitrogenous materials often are either limited or more 
expensive than inorganic nitrogen fertilizers. In addition, there 
are ③ benefits to the extensive use of either manure or legumes 
as “green manure” crops. In many cases, weed control can be 
very difficult or require much hand labor if chemicals cannot 
be used, and ④ fewer people are willing to do this work as 
societies become wealthier. Some methods used in “organic” 
farming, however, such as the sensible use of crop rotations 
and specific combinations of cropping and livestock enterprises, 
can make important ⑤ contributions to the sustainability of 
rural ecosystems.
* nitrogen fertilizer: 질소 비료
** manure: 거름
*** legume: 콩과(科) 식물
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Humour involves not just practical disengagement but 
cognitive disengagement. As long as something is funny, we 
are for the moment not concerned with whether it is real or 
fictional, true or false. This is why we give considerable 
leeway to people telling funny stories. If they are getting extra 
laughs by exaggerating the silliness of a situation or even by 
making up a few details, we are happy to grant them comic 
licence, a kind of poetic licence. Indeed, someone listening to 
a funny story who tries to correct the teller ― ‘No, he didn’t 
spill the spaghetti on the keyboard and the monitor, just on the 
keyboard’ ― will probably be told by the other listeners to 
stop interrupting. The creator of humour is putting ideas into 
people’s heads for the pleasure those ideas will bring, not to 
provide 
 information.
* cognitive: 인식의
** leeway: 여지
① accurate
② detailed
③ useful
④ additional
⑤ alternative
32. News, especially in its televised form, is constituted not 
only by its choice of topics and stories but by its 
. Presentational 
styles have been subject to a tension between an 
informational-educational purpose and the need to engage us 
entertainingly. While current affairs programmes are often 
‘serious’ in tone sticking to the ‘rules’ of balance, more 
popular programmes adopt a friendly, lighter, idiom in which 
we are invited to consider the impact of particular news items 
from the perspective of the ‘average person in the street’. 
Indeed, contemporary news construction has come to rely on an 
increased use of faster editing tempos and ‘flashier’ presentational 
styles including the use of logos, sound-bites, rapid visual cuts 
and the ‘star quality’ of news readers. Popular formats can be 
said to enhance understanding by engaging an audience unwilling 
to endure the longer verbal orientation of older news formats. 
However, they arguably work to reduce understanding by 
failing to provide the structural contexts for news events.
① coordination with traditional display techniques
② prompt and full coverage of the latest issues
③ educational media contents favoured by producers
④ commitment to long-lasting news standards
⑤ verbal and visual idioms or modes of address
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
홀수형
6
8
33. Elinor Ostrom found that there are several factors critical to 
bringing about stable institutional solutions to the problem of 
the commons. She pointed out, for instance, that the actors 
affected by the rules for the use and care of resources must 
have the right to 
. 
For that reason, the people who monitor and control the 
behavior of users should also be users and/or have been given 
a mandate by all users. This is a significant insight, as it shows 
that prospects are poor for a centrally directed solution to the 
problem of the commons coming from a state power in 
comparison with a local solution for which users assume 
personal responsibility. Ostrom also emphasizes the importance 
of democratic decision processes and that all users must be 
given access to local forums for solving problems and conflicts 
among themselves. Political institutions at central, regional, 
and local levels must allow users to devise their own regulations 
and independently ensure observance. [3점]
* commons: 공유지
** mandate: 위임
① participate in decisions to change the rules
② claim individual ownership of the resources
③ use those resources to maximize their profits
④ demand free access to the communal resources
⑤ request proper distribution based on their merits
34. Precision and determinacy are a necessary requirement for 
all meaningful scientific debate, and progress in the sciences 
is, to a large extent, the ongoing process of achieving ever 
greater precision. But historical representation puts a premium 
on a proliferation of representations, hence not on the 
refinement of one representation but on the production of 
an ever more varied set of representations. Historical insight 
is not a matter of a continuous “narrowing down” of previous 
options, not of an approximation of the truth, but, on the 
contrary, is an “explosion” of possible points of view. It 
therefore aims at the unmasking of previous illusions of 
determinacy and precision by the production of new and 
alternative representations, rather than at achieving truth by 
a careful analysis of what was right and wrong in those 
previous representations. And from this perspective, the 
development of historical insight may indeed be regarded by the 
outsider as a process of creating ever more confusion, a continuous
questioning of 
 , 
rather than, as in the sciences, an ever greater approximation 
to the truth. [3점]
* proliferation: 증식
① criteria for evaluating historical representations
② certainty and precision seemingly achieved already
③ possibilities of alternative interpretations of an event
④ coexistence of multiple viewpoints in historical writing
⑤ correctness and reliability of historical evidence collected
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Since 
their 
introduction, 
information 
systems 
have 
substantially changed the way business is conducted. ① This is 
particularly true for business in the shape and form of 
cooperation between firms that involves an integration of value 
chains across multiple units. ② The resulting networks do not 
only cover the business units of a single firm but typically also 
include multiple units from different firms. ③ As a consequence, 
firms do not only need to consider their internal organization 
in order to ensure sustainable business performance; they also 
need to take into account the entire ecosystem of units 
surrounding them. ④ Many major companies are fundamentally 
changing their business models by focusing on profitable units 
and cutting off less profitable ones. ⑤ In order to allow these 
different units to cooperate successfully, the existence of a 
common platform is crucial.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
According to the market response model, it is increasing 
prices that drive providers to search for new sources, 
innovators to substitute, consumers to conserve, and 
alternatives to emerge. 
(A) Many examples of such “green taxes” exist. Facing landfill 
costs, labor expenses, and related costs in the provision of 
garbage disposal, for example, some cities have required 
households to dispose of all waste in special trash bags, 
purchased by consumers themselves, and often costing a 
dollar or more each.
(B) Taxing certain goods or services, and so increasing prices, 
should result in either decreased use of these resources or 
creative innovation of new sources or options. The money 
raised through the tax can be used directly by the government 
either to supply services or to search for alternatives.
(C) The results have been greatly increased recycling and more 
careful attention by consumers to packaging and waste. 
By internalizing the costs of trash to consumers, there has 
been an observed decrease in the flow of garbage from 
households.
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
홀수형
7
7
8
37.
In spite of the likeness between the fictional and real 
world, the fictional world deviates from the real one in one 
important respect.
(A) The author has selected the content according to his own 
worldview and his own conception of relevance, in an 
attempt to be neutral and objective or convey a subjective 
view on the world. Whatever the motives, the author’s 
subjective conception of the world stands between the 
reader and the original, untouched world on which the 
story is based.
(B) Because of the inner qualities with which the individual is 
endowed through heritage and environment, the mind 
functions as a filter; every outside impression that passes 
through it is filtered and interpreted. However, the world 
the reader encounters in literature is already processed 
and filtered by another consciousness.
(C) The existing world faced by the individual is in principle 
an infinite chaos of events and details before it is organized 
by a human mind. This chaos only gets processed and 
modified when perceived by a human mind. [3점]
* deviate: 벗어나다
** endow: 부여하다
*** heritage: 유산
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.  
Retraining current employees for new positions within the 
company will also greatly reduce their fear of being laid 
off.
Introduction of robots into factories, while employment of human 
workers is being reduced, creates worry and fear. ( ① ) It is 
the responsibility of management to prevent or, at least, to ease 
these fears. ( ② ) For example, robots could be introduced only 
in new plants rather than replacing humans in existing assembly 
lines. ( ③ ) Workers should be included in the planning for 
new factories or the introduction of robots into existing plants, 
so they can participate in the process. ( ④ ) It may be that robots 
are needed to reduce manufacturing costs so that the company 
remains competitive, but planning for such cost reductions 
should be done jointly by labor and management. ( ⑤ ) Since 
robots are particularly good at highly repetitive simple motions, 
the replaced human workers should be moved to positions 
where judgment and decisions beyond the abilities of robots 
are required.
39.  
As long as the irrealism of the silent black and white film 
predominated, one could not take filmic fantasies for 
representations of reality. 
Cinema is valuable not for its ability to make visible the 
hidden outlines of our reality, but for its ability to reveal what 
reality itself veils ― the dimension of fantasy. ( ① ) This is 
why, to a person, the first great theorists of film decried the 
introduction of sound and other technical innovations (such as 
color) that pushed film in the direction of realism. ( ② ) Since 
cinema was an entirely fantasmatic art, these innovations were 
completely unnecessary. ( ③ ) And what’s worse, they could 
do nothing but turn filmmakers and audiences away from the 
fantasmatic dimension of cinema, potentially transforming 
film into a mere delivery device for representations of 
reality. ( ④ ) But sound and color threatened to create just 
such an illusion, thereby destroying the very essence of film 
art. ( ⑤ ) As Rudolf Arnheim puts it, “The creative power of 
the artist can only come into play where reality and the 
medium of representation do not coincide.” [3점]
* decry: 공공연히 비난하다
** fantasmatic: 환상의
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), 
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Philip Kitcher and Wesley Salmon have suggested that 
there are two possible alternatives among philosophical 
theories of explanation. One is the view that scientific 
explanation consists in the unification of broad bodies of 
phenomena under a minimal number of generalizations. 
According to this view, the (or perhaps, a) goal of science 
is to construct an economical framework of laws or 
generalizations that are capable of subsuming all observable 
phenomena. Scientific explanations organize and systematize 
our knowledge of the empirical world; the more economical 
the systematization, the deeper our understanding of what 
is explained. The other view is the causal/mechanical 
approach. According to it, a scientific explanation of a 
phenomenon consists of uncovering the mechanisms that 
produced the phenomenon of interest. This view sees the 
explanation of individual events as primary, with the 
explanation of generalizations flowing from them. That is, 
the explanation of scientific generalizations comes from 
the causal mechanisms that produce the regularities. 
* subsume: 포섭(포함)하다
** empirical: 경험적인
󰀻
Scientific explanations can be made either by seeking the 
(A)
number of principles covering all observations 
or by finding general
(B)
drawn from individual 
phenomena.
(A)
(B)
(A)
(B)
① least
…patterns
② fixed …features
③ limited …functions
④ fixed …rules
⑤ least
…assumptions
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
홀수형
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Classifying things together into groups is something we do 
all the time, and it isn’t hard to see why. Imagine trying to 
shop in a supermarket where the food was arranged in 
random order on the shelves: tomato soup next to the white 
bread in one aisle, chicken soup in the back next to the 
60-watt light bulbs, one brand of cream cheese in front and 
another in aisle 8 near the cookies. The task of finding what 
you want would be (a) time-consuming and extremely difficult, 
if not impossible. 
In the case of a supermarket, someone had to (b) design 
the system of classification. But there is also a ready-made 
system of classification embodied in our language. The word 
“dog,” for example, groups together a certain class of animals 
and distinguishes them from other animals. Such a grouping 
may seem too (c) abstract to be called a classification, but 
this is only because you have already mastered the word. As 
a child learning to speak, you had to work hard to (d) learn 
the system of classification your parents were trying to teach 
you. Before you got the hang of it, you probably made 
mistakes, like calling the cat a dog. If you hadn’t learned to 
speak, the whole world would seem like the (e) unorganized 
supermarket; you would be in the position of an infant, for 
whom every object is new and unfamiliar. In learning the 
principles of classification, therefore, we’ll be learning about 
the structure that lies at the core of our language.
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Similarities of Strategies in Sales and Language Learning
② Classification: An Inherent Characteristic of Language
③ Exploring Linguistic Issues Through Categorization
④ Is a Ready-Made Classification System Truly Better?
⑤ Dilemmas of Using Classification in Language Education
42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 
것은?
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e) 
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
In the gym, members of the taekwondo club were busy 
practicing. Some were trying to kick as high as they could, 
and some were striking the sparring pad. Anna, the head of 
the club, was teaching the new members basic moves. Close 
by, her friend Jane was assisting Anna. Jane noticed that 
Anna was glancing at the entrance door of the gym. She 
seemed to be expecting someone. At last, when Anna took a 
break, Jane came over to (a) her and asked, “Hey, are you 
waiting for Cora?”
(B)
Cora walked in like a wounded soldier with bandages on 
her face and arms. Surprised, Anna and Jane simply looked at 
her with their eyes wide open. Cora explained, “I’m sorry 
I’ve been absent. I got into a bicycle accident, and I was in 
the hospital for two days. Finally, the doctor gave me the 
okay to practice.” Anna said excitedly, “No problem! We’re 
thrilled to have you back!” Then, Jane gave Anna an 
apologetic look, and (b) she responded with a friendly pat on 
Jane’s shoulder.
(C)
Anna answered the question by nodding uneasily. In fact, 
Jane knew what her friend was thinking. Cora was a new 
member, whom Anna had personally invited to join the club. 
Anna really liked (c) her. Although her budget was tight, 
Anna bought Cora a taekwondo uniform. When she received 
it, Cora thanked her and promised, “I’ll come to practice and 
work hard every day.” However, unexpectedly, she came to 
practice only once and then never showed up again.
(D)
Since Cora had missed several practices, Anna wondered 
what could have happened. Jane, on the other hand, was 
disappointed and said judgingly, “Still waiting for her, huh? I 
can’t believe (d) you don’t feel disappointed or angry. Why 
don’t you forget about her?” Anna replied, “Well, I know 
most newcomers don’t keep their commitment to the club, 
but I thought that Cora would be different. She said she 
would come every day and practice.” Just as Jane was about 
to respond to (e) her, the door swung open. There she was!
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)
② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
것은?
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Anna는 신입 회원에게 태권도를 가르쳤다.
② Anna와 Jane은 Cora를 보고 놀라지 않았다.
③ Anna는 Cora에게 태권도 도복을 사 주었다.
④ Cora는 여러 차례 연습에 참여하지 않았다.
⑤ Anna는 Cora를 대다수의 신입 회원과 다를 것이라 생각했다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
