1
8
  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
① 학생회장 선거 투표 결과를 공지하려고
② 음악 경연 대회 참가 신청을 권장하려고
③ 홈 쇼핑 가전제품 구매 방법을 설명하려고
④ 새로운 음악 프로그램 방송 일정을 안내하려고
⑤ 노래 경연 우승자 선정을 위한 투표를 독려하려고
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 아이들은 집안일을 함으로써 자존감을 높일 수 있다.
② 아이들의 나이에 맞는 균형 잡힌 식단 관리가 필요하다.
③ 집안일을 통해 아이들에게 경제관념을 심어 줄 수 있다.
④ 적절한 보상은 아이들의 독서 습관 형성에 도움이 된다.
⑤ 여행을 통해 아이들에게 가족의 중요성을 일깨워 줄 수 있다.
3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 정원사－파티 플래너
② 꽃집 점원－식당 주인
③ 꽃꽂이 강사－수강생
④ 식물학 교수－행정실 직원
⑤ 잡지 편집장－음식 칼럼니스트
 
4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 필터 주문하기
② 어항 물 갈기
③ 체리 주스 만들기
④ 세탁물 맡기기
⑤ 히터 온도 조절하기
6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
① $50
② $60
③ $65
④ $75
⑤ $85
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 Career Day 행사 장소를 변경하려는 이유를 
고르시오.
① 초청 강사의 요청이 있어서
② 다른 행사와 장소가 겹쳐서
③ 신청 학생이 예상보다 많아서
④ 보수 공사 소음이 시끄러워서
⑤ 세미나실 프로젝터가 고장 나서
8. 대화를 듣고, Digital Publishing Workshop에 관해 언급되지 
않은 것을 고르시오.
① 목적
② 대상
③ 날짜
④ 등록 방법
⑤ 준비물
9. 2021 Playground in the Park에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 라디오 방송국이 주최한다.
② 다섯 개의 놀이 구역이 있다.
③ 최대 60명의 아이들이 참여할 수 있다.
④ 행사장에서 음식을 구입할 수 없다.
⑤ 비가 오면 일정이 조정된다.
10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구매할 블루투스 이어폰을 
고르시오.
Bluetooth Earphones
Model
Battery Life
Wireless 
Charging 
Price 
Case Cover 
Material
①
A
2 hours
☓
  $49.99
Silicone
②
B
3 hours
◯
  $69.99
Silicone
③
C
3 hours
☓
  $79.99
Leather
④
D
4 hours
◯
  $89.99
Leather
⑤
E
5 hours
◯
$109.99
Leather
11. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Yes. I only communicate face-to-face.
② Me, too. Don’t put me in the chat room.
③ Right. We don’t have biology class today.
④ No. We’ve already finished our group project.
⑤ Sure. I’ll open a chat room and invite everyone.
12. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Thank you. I’m relieved to hear that.
② It’s terrible. I’ll go check if it’s ready.
③ That’s great. It’s good to be back home.
④ Okay. You’re free to read in the living room.
⑤ No way. Turn off the lights when you go to bed. 
2022학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2
8
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① Too bad. I hope you’ll feel better soon. 
② Of course. I’m sure you’ll win the race.
③ I see. I’ve never been a cycling champion.
④ All right. I’ll be just fine at the competition. 
⑤ Terrific. I’m also looking forward to the camp.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① No problem. I can email you the details of our program.
② No worries. I’ll let you know what day is available.
③ That’s right. I need to get more students.
④ That’s true. It’s difficult to explain scientific principles.
⑤ Brilliant. I can recommend a good science fiction movie.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Megan이 Philip에게 할 말로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Megan:
① You can sign up for our membership and get a discount.
② I regret to say that I can’t find your membership number.
③ Unfortunately, the poster you’re looking for is not for sale.
④ Congratulations on the successful release of your new book.
⑤ I’m afraid the members’ discount doesn’t apply to this book.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
① what issues arise from abandoned pets
② how city growth affected wildlife diversity
③ why wild animals came to flourish in cities
④ ways to make cities environmentally friendly
⑤ problems between humans and animals in cities
17. 언급된 도시가 아닌 것은?
① Paris
② London
③ Delhi
④ Bangkok
⑤ New York City
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Mr. Bernstein,
My name is Thomas Cobb, the marketing director of 
Calbary Hospital. Our hospital is planning to hold a charity 
concert on September 18th in the Main Hall of our hospital. 
We expect it to be helpful in raising money to cover the 
medical costs of those in need. To make the concert more 
special, we want to invite you for the opening of the concert. 
Your reputation as a pianist is well known, and everyone will 
be very happy to see your performance. Beautiful piano 
melodies will help create an enjoyable experience for the 
audience. We look forward to your positive reply.
Sincerely,
Thomas A. Cobb
① 의료비 지원이 필요한 이들을 위한 기부를 독려하려고
② 자선 음악회 연주자로 참여해 줄 것을 요청하려고
③ 피아노 독주회 관람 신청 방법을 문의하려고
④ 병원 개관 기념행사 참가 방법을 안내하려고
⑤ 병원 진료 시간이 변경된 것을 알려 주려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 David의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
As he stepped onto the basketball court, David suddenly 
thought of the day he had gotten injured last season and froze. 
He was not sure if he could play as well as before the injury. A 
serious wrist injury had caused him to miss the rest of the 
season. Remembering the surgery, he said to himself, “I thought 
my basketball career was completely over.” However, upon 
hearing his fans’ wild cheers, he felt his body coming alive and 
thought, “For sure, my fans, friends, and family are looking 
forward to watching me play today.” As soon as the game 
started, he was filled with energy. The first five shots he 
attempted went in the basket. “I’m back! I got this,” he shouted.
① disappointed → unhappy
② excited
→ indifferent
③ anxious
→ confident
④ impatient → calm
⑤ eager
→ ashamed
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
We live in a time when everyone seems to be looking for 
quick and sure solutions. Computer companies have even 
begun to advertise ways in which computers can replace 
parents. They are too late ―television has already done that.  
Seriously, however, in every branch of education, including 
moral education, we make a mistake when we suppose that a 
particular batch of content or a particular teaching method or a 
particular configuration of students and space will accomplish 
our ends. The answer is both harder and simpler. We, parents 
and teachers, have to live with our children, talk to them, 
listen to them, enjoy their company, and show them by what 
we do and how we talk that it is possible to live appreciatively 
or, at least, nonviolently with most other people.
① 교육은 일상에서 아이들과의 상호 작용을 통해 이루어져야 한다.
② 도덕 교육을 강화하여 타인을 배려하는 공동체 의식을 높여야 한다.
③ 텔레비전의 부정적 영향을 줄이려는 사회적 노력이 있어야 한다.
④ 다양한 매체를 활용하여 학교와 가정 교육의 한계를 보완해야 한다.
⑤ 아이들의 온라인 예절 교육을 위해 적절한 콘텐츠를 개발해야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
21. 밑줄 친 Flicking the collaboration light switch가 다음 글에서 
의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Flicking the collaboration light switch is something that 
leaders are uniquely positioned to do, because several 
obstacles stand in the way of people voluntarily working 
alone. For one thing, the fear of being left out of the loop can 
keep them glued to their enterprise social media. Individuals 
don’t want to be ―or appear to be ―isolated. For another, 
knowing what their teammates are doing provides a sense of 
comfort and security, because people can adjust their own 
behavior to be in harmony with the group. It’s risky to go off 
on their own to try something new that will probably not be 
successful right from the start. But even though it feels 
reassuring for individuals to be hyperconnected, it’s better for 
the organization if they periodically go off and think for 
themselves and generate diverse ―if not quite mature ―ideas. 
Thus, it becomes the leader’s job to create conditions that are 
good for the whole by enforcing intermittent interaction even 
when people wouldn’t choose it for themselves, without 
making it seem like a punishment.
* intermittent: 간헐적인
① breaking physical barriers and group norms that prohibit cooperation
② having people stop working together and start working individually
③ encouraging people to devote more time to online collaboration
④ shaping environments where higher productivity is required
⑤ requiring workers to focus their attention on group projects
22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Historically, the professions and society have engaged in a 
negotiating process intended to define the terms of their 
relationship. At the heart of this process is the tension between 
the professions’ pursuit of autonomy and the public’s demand 
for accountability. Society’s granting of power and privilege to 
the professions is premised on their willingness and ability to 
contribute to social well-being and to conduct their affairs in a 
manner consistent with broader social values. It has long been 
recognized that the expertise and privileged position of 
professionals confer authority and power that could readily be 
used to advance their own interests at the expense of those they 
serve. As Edmund Burke observed two centuries ago, “Men are 
qualified for civil liberty in exact proportion to their disposition 
to put moral chains upon their own appetites.” Autonomy has 
never been a one-way street and is never granted absolutely and 
irreversibly. 
* autonomy: 자율성
** privilege: 특권
*** premise: 전제로 말하다
① 전문직에 부여되는 자율성은 그에 상응하는 사회적 책임을 수반한다.
② 전문직의 권위는 해당 집단의 이익을 추구하는 데 이용되어 왔다.
③ 전문직의 사회적 책임을 규정할 수 있는 제도 정비가 필요하다.
④ 전문직이 되기 위한 자격 요건은 사회 경제적 요구에 따라 변화해 왔다. 
⑤ 전문직의 업무 성과는 일정 수준의 자율성과 특권이 부여될 때 높아진다.
23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
In Kant’s view, geometrical shapes are too perfect to induce 
an aesthetic experience. Insofar as they agree with the 
underlying concept or idea ―thus possessing the precision 
that the ancient Greeks sought and celebrated ―geometrical 
shapes can be grasped, but they do not give rise to emotion, 
and, most importantly, they do not move the imagination to 
free and new (mental) lengths. Forms or phenomena, on the 
contrary, that possess a degree of immeasurability, or that do 
not appear constrained, stimulate the human imagination ―
hence their ability to induce a sublime aesthetic experience. 
The pleasure associated with experiencing immeasurable 
objects ―indefinable or formless objects ―can be defined as 
enjoying one’s own emotional and mental activity. Namely, 
the pleasure consists of being challenged and struggling to 
understand and decode the phenomenon present to view. 
Furthermore, part of the pleasure comes from having one’s 
comfort zone (momentarily) violated.
* geometrical: 기하학의
** aesthetic: 심미적인
*** sublime: 숭고한
① diversity of aesthetic experiences in different eras
② inherent beauty in geometrically perfect shapes
③ concepts of imperfection in modern aesthetics
④ natural inclination towards aesthetic precision
⑤ aesthetic pleasure from things unconstrained 
24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
The world has become a nation of laws and governance that has 
introduced a system of public administration and management to 
keep order. With this administrative management system, urban 
institutions of government have evolved to offer increasing 
levels of services to their citizenry, provided through a taxation 
process and/or fee for services (e.g., police and fire, street 
maintenance, utilities, waste management, etc.). Frequently this 
has displaced citizen involvement. Money for services is not a 
replacement for citizen responsibility and public participation. 
Responsibility of the citizen is slowly being supplanted by 
government being the substitute provider. Consequentially, there 
is a philosophical and social change in attitude and sense of 
responsibility of our urban-based society to become involved. 
The sense of community and associated responsibility of all 
citizens to be active participants is therefore diminishing. 
Governmental substitution for citizen duty and involvement can 
have serious implications. This impedes the nations of the world 
to be responsive to natural and man-made disasters as part of 
global preparedness.
* supplant: 대신하다
** impede: 방해하다
① A Sound Citizen Responsibility in a Sound Government
② Always Better than Nothing: The Roles of Modern Government
③ Decreased Citizen Involvement: A Cost of Governmental Services
④ Why Does Global Citizenship Matter in Contemporary Society?
⑤ How to Maximize Public Benefits of Urban-Based Society
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
U.S. States That Added the Most Solar Industry Workers
Between 2015 and 2020
Rank
State
Number of 
Workers Added
Growth 
Percentage (%) 
1
Florida
4,659
71
2
Utah
4,246
158
3
Texas
3,058
44
4
Virginia
2,352
120
5
Minnesota
2,003
101
6
New York
1,964
24
7
Pennsylvania
1,810
72
The table above shows seven U.S. states ranked by the 
number of workers added in the solar industry between 2015 
and 2020, and provides information on the corresponding 
growth percentage in each state. ① During this period, Florida, 
which ranked first with regard to the number of workers added, 
exhibited 71% growth. ② The number of workers added in 
Utah was more than twice the number of workers added in 
Minnesota. ③ Regarding Texas and Virginia, each state showed 
less than 50% growth. ④ New York added more than 1,900 
workers, displaying 24% growth. ⑤ Among these seven states, 
Pennsylvania added the lowest number of workers during this 
period.
26. Henry Moore에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Henry Moore (1898—1986), one of the most significant 
British artists of the 20th century, was the seventh child of a 
coal miner. Henry Moore showed a talent for art from early on 
in school. After World War I, during which he volunteered for 
army service, Moore began to study sculpture at the Leeds 
School of Art. Then, he entered the Royal College of Art in 
London and earned his degree there. His sculptures, known 
around the world, present the forms of the body in a unique 
way. One of his artistic themes was mother-and-child as 
shown in Madonna and Child at St. Matthew’s Church in 
Northampton. He achieved financial success from his hard 
work and established the Henry Moore Foundation to support 
education and promotion of the arts.
① 석탄 광부의 일곱 번째 자녀였다.
② 학창 시절에 일찍이 예술에 재능을 보였다.
③ 런던에 있는 Royal College of Art에서 학위를 취득했다. 
④ 그의 조각은 신체 형태를 독특한 방식으로 나타낸다.
⑤ 경제적으로 성공을 거두지 못했다.
27. 2021 Whir Car Drawing Contest for Kids에 관한 다음 
안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 출품작 중 10개를 선정해서 시상한다.
② 그림 기술이 심사에서 고려된다.
③ 그림을 찍은 사진을 웹사이트에 업로드해야 한다.
④ 그림은 가족과 차를 포함해야 한다.
⑤ 참가자의 나이는 3세에서 7세까지로 제한된다.
28. Mary High School Foreign Language Program에 관한 다음 
안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 학생은 두 개의 언어를 선택할 수 있다.
② 수업은 주말에 진행된다.
③ 수업료는 등록 시 전액 납부하지 않아도 된다.
④ 9월 5일까지 취소하면 환불받을 수 있다.
⑤ 수업 관련 문의는 이메일을 통해서만 할 수 있다.
2021 Whir Car Drawing Contest for Kids 
Theme: Family
Does your child love cars? Take this opportunity for 
your child to think about what they love and draw it. They 
will definitely enjoy and learn from this contest!
Details
∙Ten entries are chosen, and each is 
awarded a $50 gift certificate.
∙Drawing skills are not considered in judging.
Submission
∙Take a photo of your child’s drawing. 
∙Visit our website (www.whircar4kids.com) and upload the 
photo by October 3.
Note
∙The drawing should contain your family and a car.
∙Participants must be 3 to 7 years old.
Please visit our website to learn more.
Mary High School Foreign Language Program
Would you like to learn about another culture? Learning 
a new language is the best way to do it. Please come and 
enjoy our new foreign language classes.
Languages: Arabic, French, Spanish (A student can choose 
only one.)
Dates and Times: September 13, 2021 — October 29, 2021
Monday to Friday, 4:00 p.m. — 6:00 p.m.
Registration: Available from September 1 to September 5 
on our website (www.maryhighs.edu) 
Tuition Fee: $50 (Full payment is required when registering.)
Refund Policy: If you cancel on or before September 5, your 
payment will be refunded.
For more information about the classes, feel free to contact us 
at (215) 8393-6047 or email us at info@maryhighs.edu.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Accepting whatever others are communicating only pays off 
if their interests correspond to ours ―think cells in a body, 
bees in a beehive. As far as communication between humans 
is concerned, such commonality of interests ① is rarely 
achieved; even a pregnant mother has reasons to mistrust the 
chemical signals sent by her fetus. Fortunately, there are ways 
of making communication work even in the most adversarial 
of relationships. A prey can convince a predator not to chase 
② it. But for such communication to occur, there must be 
strong guarantees ③ which those who receive the signal will 
be better off believing it. The messages have to be kept, on the 
whole, ④ honest. In the case of humans, honesty is maintained 
by a set of cognitive mechanisms that evaluate ⑤ communicated 
information. These mechanisms allow us to accept most 
beneficial messages ―to be open ―while rejecting most 
harmful messages ―to be vigilant.
* fetus: 태아
** adversarial: 반대자의
*** vigilant: 경계하는
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
않은 것은? [3점]
In economic systems what takes place in one sector has 
impacts on another; demand for a good or service in one sector is 
derived from another. For instance, a consumer buying a good in 
a store will likely trigger the replacement of this product, which 
will generate ① demands for activities such as manufacturing, 
resource extraction and, of course, transport. What is different 
about transport is that it cannot exist alone and a movement 
cannot be ② stored. An unsold product can remain on the shelf 
of a store until bought (often with discount incentives), but an 
unsold seat on a flight or unused cargo capacity in the same 
flight remains unsold and cannot be brought back as additional 
capacity ③ later. In this case an opportunity has been ④ seized, 
since the amount of transport being offered has exceeded the 
demand for it. The derived demand of transportation is often very 
difficult to reconcile with an equivalent supply, and actually 
transport companies would prefer to have some additional 
capacity to accommodate ⑤ unforeseen demand (often at much 
higher prices).
* reconcile: 조화시키다
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. When examining the archaeological record of human culture, 
one has to consider that it is vastly __________. Many aspects 
of human culture have what archaeologists describe as low 
archaeological visibility, meaning they are difficult to identify 
archaeologically. Archaeologists tend to focus on tangible (or 
material) aspects of culture: things that can be handled and 
photographed, such as tools, food, and structures. Reconstructing 
intangible aspects of culture is more difficult, requiring that 
one draw more inferences from the tangible. It is relatively 
easy, for example, for archaeologists to identify and draw 
inferences about technology and diet from stone tools and 
food remains. Using the same kinds of physical remains to 
draw inferences about social systems and what people were 
thinking about is more difficult. Archaeologists do it, but there 
are necessarily more inferences involved in getting from 
physical remains recognized as trash to making interpretations 
about belief systems.
* archaeological: 고고학의
① outdated
② factual
③ incomplete
④ organized
⑤ detailed
32. Even as mundane a behavior as watching TV may be a way 
for some people to 
. 
To test this idea, Sophia Moskalenko and Steven Heine gave 
participants false feedback about their test performance, and 
then seated each one in front of a TV set to watch a video as 
the next part of the study. When the video came on, showing 
nature scenes with a musical soundtrack, the experimenter 
exclaimed that this was the wrong video and went supposedly 
to get the correct one, leaving the participant alone as the 
video played. The participants who had received failure 
feedback watched the video much longer than those who 
thought they had succeeded. The researchers concluded that 
distraction through television viewing can effectively relieve 
the discomfort associated with painful failures or mismatches 
between the self and self-guides. In contrast, successful 
participants had little wish to be distracted from their 
self-related thoughts!
* mundane: 보통의
① ignore uncomfortable comments from their close peers
② escape painful self-awareness through distraction
③ receive constructive feedback from the media
④ refocus their divided attention to a given task 
⑤ engage themselves in intense self-reflection
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. It is important to recognise the interdependence between 
individual, culturally formed actions and the state of cultural 
integration. People work within the forms provided by the 
cultural patterns that they have internalised, however 
contradictory these may be. Ideas are worked out as logical 
implications or consequences of other accepted ideas, and it is in 
this way that cultural innovations and discoveries are possible. 
New ideas are discovered through logical reasoning, but such 
discoveries are inherent in and integral to the conceptual system 
and are made possible only because of the acceptance of its 
premises. For example, the discoveries of new prime numbers 
are ‘real’ consequences of the particular number system employed. 
Thus, cultural ideas show ‘advances’ and ‘developments’ 
because they 
. The 
cumulative work of many individuals produces a corpus of 
knowledge within which certain ‘discoveries’ become possible 
or more likely. Such discoveries are ‘ripe’ and could not have 
occurred earlier and are also likely to be made simultaneously 
by numbers of individuals. [3점]
* corpus: 집적(集積)
** simultaneously: 동시에
① are outgrowths of previous ideas
② stem from abstract reasoning ability
③ form the basis of cultural universalism
④ emerge between people of the same age
⑤ promote individuals’ innovative thinking
34. Enabling animals to 
 
is an almost universal function of learning. Most animals 
innately avoid objects they have not previously encountered. 
Unfamiliar objects may be dangerous; treating them with 
caution has survival value. If persisted in, however, such 
careful behavior could interfere with feeding and other 
necessary activities to the extent that the benefit of caution 
would be lost. A turtle that withdraws into its shell at every 
puff of wind or whenever a cloud casts a shadow would never 
win races, not even with a lazy rabbit. To overcome this 
problem, almost all animals habituate to safe stimuli that occur 
frequently. Confronted by a strange object, an inexperienced 
animal may freeze or attempt to hide, but if nothing unpleasant 
happens, sooner or later it will continue its activity. The 
possibility also exists that an unfamiliar object may be useful, 
so if it poses no immediate threat, a closer inspection may be 
worthwhile. [3점]
* innately: 선천적으로
① weigh the benefits of treating familiar things with care
② plan escape routes after predicting possible attacks
③ overcome repeated feeding failures for survival
④ operate in the presence of harmless stimuli
⑤ monitor the surrounding area regularly
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
A variety of theoretical perspectives provide insight into 
immigration. Economics, which assumes that actors engage in 
utility maximization, represents one framework. ① From this 
perspective, it is assumed that individuals are rational actors, 
i.e., that they make migration decisions based on their 
assessment of the costs as well as benefits of remaining in a 
given area versus the costs and benefits of leaving. ② Benefits 
may include but are not limited to short-term and long-term 
monetary gains, safety, and greater freedom of cultural 
expression. ③ People with greater financial benefits tend to 
use their money to show off their social status by purchasing 
luxurious items. ④ Individual costs include but are not limited 
to the expense of travel, uncertainty of living in a foreign land, 
difficulty of adapting to a different language, uncertainty about 
a different culture, and the great concern about living in a new 
land. ⑤ Psychic costs associated with separation from family, 
friends, and the fear of the unknown also should be taken into 
account in cost-benefit assessments.
* psychic: 심적인
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
Green products involve, in many cases, higher ingredient 
costs than those of mainstream products. 
(A) They’d rather put money and time into known, profitable, 
high-volume products that serve populous customer 
segments than into risky, less-profitable, low-volume 
products that may serve current noncustomers. Given that 
choice, these companies may choose to leave the green 
segment of the market to small niche competitors.
(B) Even if the green product succeeds, it may cannibalize the 
company’s higher-profit mainstream offerings. Given such 
downsides, companies serving mainstream consumers with 
successful mainstream products face what seems like an 
obvious investment decision.
(C) Furthermore, the restrictive ingredient lists and design 
criteria that are typical of such products may make 
green products inferior to mainstream products on core 
performance dimensions (e.g., less effective cleansers). In 
turn, the higher costs and lower performance of some 
products attract only a small portion of the customer base, 
leading to lower economies of scale in procurement, 
manufacturing, and distribution.
* segment: 조각
** cannibalize: 잡아먹다
*** procurement: 조달
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
Recently, a number of commercial ventures have been 
launched that offer social robots as personal home 
assistants, perhaps eventually to rival existing smart-home 
assistants.
(A) They might be motorized and can track the user around 
the room, giving the impression of being aware of the 
people in the environment. Although personal robotic 
assistants provide services similar to those of smart-home 
assistants, their social presence offers an opportunity that 
is unique to social robots.
(B) Personal robotic assistants are devices that have no 
physical manipulation or locomotion capabilities. Instead, 
they have a distinct social presence and have visual 
features suggestive of their ability to interact socially, such 
as eyes, ears, or a mouth.
(C) For instance, in addition to playing music, a social personal 
assistant robot would express its engagement with the 
music so that users would feel like they are listening to the 
music together with the robot. These robots can be used as 
surveillance devices, act as communicative intermediates, 
engage in richer games, tell stories, or be used to provide 
encouragement or incentives. [3점]
* locomotion: 이동
** surveillance: 감시
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
It was not until relatively recent times that scientists came 
to understand the relationships between the structural 
elements of materials and their properties. 
The earliest humans had access to only a very limited number 
of materials, those that occur naturally: stone, wood, clay, 
skins, and so on. ( ① ) With time, they discovered techniques 
for producing materials that had properties superior to those of 
the natural ones; these new materials included pottery and 
various metals. ( ② ) Furthermore, it was discovered that the 
properties of a material could be altered by heat treatments and 
by the addition of other substances. ( ③ ) At this point, materials 
utilization was totally a selection process that involved deciding 
from a given, rather limited set of materials, the one best suited 
for an application based on its characteristics. ( ④ ) This 
knowledge, acquired over approximately the past 100 years, has 
empowered them to fashion, to a large degree, the characteristics 
of materials. ( ⑤ ) Thus, tens of thousands of different materials 
have evolved with rather specialized characteristics that meet 
the needs of our modern and complex society, including metals, 
plastics, glasses, and fibers. 
39.
Personal stories connect with larger narratives to generate 
new identities.
The growing complexity of the social dynamics determining 
food choices makes the job of marketers and advertisers 
increasingly more difficult. ( ① ) In the past, mass production 
allowed for accessibility and affordability of products, as well 
as their wide distribution, and was accepted as a sign of 
progress. ( ② ) Nowadays it is increasingly replaced by 
the fragmentation of consumers among smaller and smaller 
segments that are supposed to reflect personal preferences.
( ③ ) Everybody feels different and special and expects 
products serving his or her inclinations. ( ④ ) In reality, these 
supposedly individual preferences end up overlapping with 
emerging, 
temporary, 
always 
changing, 
almost 
tribal 
formations solidifying around cultural sensibilities, social 
identifications, political sensibilities, and dietary and health 
concerns. ( ⑤ ) These consumer communities go beyond 
national boundaries, feeding on global and widely shared 
repositories of ideas, images, and practices. [3점]
* fragmentation: 파편화
** repository: 저장소
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), 
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
The computer has, to a considerable extent, solved the 
problem of acquiring, preserving, and retrieving information. 
Data can be stored in effectively unlimited quantities and in 
manageable form. The computer makes available a range of 
data unattainable in the age of books. It packages it 
effectively; style is no longer needed to make it accessible, 
nor is memorization. In dealing with a single decision 
separated from its context, the computer supplies tools 
unimaginable even a decade ago. But it also diminishes 
perspective. Because information is so accessible and 
communication instantaneous, there is a diminution of focus 
on its significance, or even on the definition of what is 
significant. This dynamic may encourage policymakers to 
wait for an issue to arise rather than anticipate it, and to 
regard moments of decision as a series of isolated events 
rather than part of a historical continuum. When this 
happens, manipulation of information replaces reflection as 
the principal policy tool.
* retrieve: (정보를) 추출하다
** diminution: 감소
󰀻
Although the computer is clearly 
(A)
 at handling 
information in a decontextualized way, it interferes with our 
making 
(B)
 judgments related to the broader 
context, as can be seen in policymaking processes.
(A)
(B)
(A)
(B)
① competent ……comprehensive
② dominant
……biased
③ imperfect ……informed
④ impressive ……legal
⑤ inefficient ……timely
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
In studies examining the effectiveness of vitamin C, 
researchers typically divide the subjects into two groups. One 
group (the experimental group) receives a vitamin C 
supplement, and the other (the control group) does not. 
Researchers observe both groups to determine whether one 
group has fewer or shorter colds than the other. The following 
discussion describes some of the pitfalls inherent in an 
experiment of this kind and ways to (a) avoid them. In sorting 
subjects into two groups, researchers must ensure that each 
person has an (b) equal chance of being assigned to either the 
experimental group or the control group. This is accomplished 
by randomization; that is, the subjects are chosen randomly 
from the same population by flipping a coin or some other 
method involving chance. Randomization helps to ensure that 
results reflect the treatment and not factors that might 
influence the grouping of subjects. Importantly, the two 
groups of people must be similar and must have the same track 
record with respect to colds to (c) rule out the possibility that 
observed differences in the rate, severity, or duration of colds 
might have occurred anyway. If, for example, the control 
group would normally catch twice as many colds as the 
experimental group, then the findings prove (d) nothing. In 
experiments involving a nutrient, the diets of both groups must 
also be (e) different, especially with respect to the nutrient 
being studied. If those in the experimental group were 
receiving less vitamin C from their usual diet, then any effects 
of the supplement may not be apparent.
* pitfall: 함정
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Perfect Planning and Faulty Results: A Sad Reality in Research
② Don’t Let Irrelevant Factors Influence the Results!
③ Protect Human Subjects Involved in Experimental Research!
④ What Nutrients Could Better Defend Against Colds?
⑤ In-depth Analysis of Nutrition: A Key Player for Human Health
42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 것은?
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e) 
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
When Sally came back home from her photography class, 
she could hear Katie moving around, chopping things on a 
wooden cutting board. Wondering what her roommate was 
doing, (a) she ran to the kitchen. Sally watched Katie 
cooking something that looked delicious. But Katie didn’t 
notice her because she was too focused on preparing for her 
cooking test the next day. She was trying to remember what 
her professor had said in class that day.
(B)
Katie, surprised by her roommate’s words, turned her head 
to Sally and sighed, “I don’t know. This is really hard.” 
Stirring her sauce for pasta, Katie continued, “Professor 
Brown said that visual aspects make up a key part of a meal. 
My recipe seems good, but I can’t think of any ways to alter 
the feeling of the final dish.” Visibly frustrated, (b) she was 
just about to throw away all of her hard work and start again, 
when Sally suddenly stopped her. 
(C)
“Wait! You don’t have to start over. You just need to add 
some color to the plate.” Being curious, Katie asked, “How 
can (c) I do that?” Sally took out a container of vegetables 
from the refrigerator and replied, “How about making colored 
pasta to go with (d) your sauce?” Smiling, she added, “It’s not 
that hard, and all you need are brightly colored vegetables to 
make your pasta green, orange, or even purple.” Katie smiled, 
knowing that now she could make her pasta with beautiful 
colors like a photographer.
(D)
In that class, Professor Brown said, “You have to present 
your food properly, considering every stage of the dining 
experience. Imagine you are a photographer.” Recalling what 
the professor had mentioned, Katie said to herself, “We need 
to see our ingredients as colors that make up a picture.” Sally 
could clearly see that Katie was having a hard time preparing 
for her cooking test. Trying to make (e) her feel better, Sally 
kindly asked, “Is there anything I can do to help?”
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)
② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
것은?
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Sally는 사진 수업 후 집으로 돌아왔다.
② Brown 교수님은 음식에서 시각적인 면이 중요하다고 말했다.
③ Sally는 냉장고에서 채소가 든 그릇을 꺼냈다.
④ Sally는 색깔 있는 파스타를 만드는 것이 어렵다고 말했다.
⑤ Katie는 요리 시험 준비에 어려움을 겪고 있었다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
