1
8
  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
① 저작권 위반 사례를 소개하려고
② 홈페이지 점검 시간을 공지하려고
③ 보안 시스템 업그레이드를 권장하려고
④ 웹사이트 제작 프로그램을 홍보하려고
⑤ 조립식 컴퓨터 구매 방법을 설명하려고
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 매일 다양한 색의 채소를 섭취해야 한다.
② 채소의 종류에 따라 세척 방법이 달라야 한다.
③ 채소는 수확 시기에 따라 맛이 달라질 수 있다.
④ 채소는 냉장 보관하면 비타민 파괴를 늦출 수 있다.
⑤ 익혀서 조리하는 것이 건강에 더 좋은 채소가 있다.
3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 공연 기획자 － 연극배우
② 패션 디자이너 － 사진작가
③ 예술가 － 전시회 관람객
④ 건축가 － 인테리어 업체 직원
⑤ 보안 요원 － 기념품 판매원
4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
5. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 배드민턴 레슨 등록하기
② 신입 회원에게 행사 공지하기
③ 홍보 포스터 제작하기
④ 소셜 미디어 계정 만들기
⑤ 안내문 게시하기
6. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $40
② $45
③ $50
④ $55
⑤ $65
7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 과학 보고서 대회에서 상을 받지 못한 
이유를 고르시오.
① 실험 사진을 포함시키지 않아서
② 마감 기한을 지키지 못해서
③ 주제가 창의적이지 않아서
④ 부정확한 정보를 사용해서
⑤ 제시된 분량을 초과해서
8. 대화를 듣고, 2022 Technology Fair에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 
고르시오.
① 주제
② 참여 업체
③ 장소
④ 입장료
⑤ 종료일
9. Junior Money Smart Course에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 
않는 것을 고르시오.
① 강사는 경제학 교수이다.
② 고등학생만을 대상으로 한다.
③ 월요일부터 금요일까지 진행될 것이다.
④ 7월에 등록이 시작된다.
⑤ 등록자 전원에게 선물을 제공할 것이다.
10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 구입할 책상용 태블릿 
거치대를 고르시오.
Tablet Stands for Desks
Model
Price
Material
Foldable
Color
①
A
$11
Plastic
☓
White
②
B
$12
Plastic
◯
Silver
③
C
$14
Wood
◯
Black
④
D
$16
Aluminum
☓
Silver
⑤
E
$21
Aluminum
◯
Black
11. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① No problem. I’ll put it in the refrigerator.
② Of course. I’ll check tomorrow’s weather.
③ Okay. We can buy it at the store after work.
④ Great. Let’s order from a seafood restaurant.
⑤ Never mind. I don’t care if it’s delivered late.
12. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Absolutely. I’m proud of my son.
② Fantastic. He’ll really enjoy the ride.
③ Too bad. He should have come earlier.
④ It’s all right. The line is getting shorter.
⑤ I’m sorry. Then he’s not allowed to ride.
2023학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2
8
13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① Don’t worry. I’ll check the date for you.
② Oh, no. We don’t have time to print it out.
③ I see. I’ll put the bread back in the package.
④ I agree. We need to buy more cream cheese.
⑤ Good. I’ll bring some bread to the neighbors.
14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① No, thanks. We already have enough eco-bags.
② That’s a relief. Then we can prepare more presents.
③ That’s true. Last year’s festival was a great success.
④ I appreciate that. That’s why I’ve won the quiz event.
⑤ Right. The book you recommended was so interesting.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Tom이 Alice에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오. [3점]
Tom:
① You should take advantage of negative reviews for your business.
② You’d better take an online class to get a degree in marketing.
③ Don’t forget the negative effects of enlarging your business.
④ Why don’t you put up an advertisement for your products?
⑤ How about starting a new online business together?
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① how birds cooperate to collect nesting materials
② why birds use certain materials in nest building
③ natural substances that are harmful to bird nests
④ shortage of birds’ nesting materials in urban areas
⑤ industrial building materials inspired by bird nests
17. 언급된 재료가 아닌 것은?
① feathers
② mud
③ spiderwebs
④ leaves
⑤ stones
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Hylean Miller,
Hello, I’m Nelson Perkins, a teacher and swimming coach 
at Broomstone High School. Last week, I made a reservation 
for one of your company’s swimming pools for our summer 
swim camp. However, due to its popularity, thirty more students 
are coming to the camp than we expected, so we need one 
more swimming pool for them. The rental section on your 
website says that there are two other swimming pools during 
the summer season: the Splash Pool and the Rainbow Pool. 
Please let me know if an additional rental would be possible. 
Thank you in advance.
Best Wishes,
Nelson Perkins 
① 수영 캠프 참가 날짜를 변경하려고
② 수영장 수용 가능 인원을 확인하려고
③ 수영 캠프 등록 방법에 대해 알아보려고
④ 수영장 추가 대여 가능 여부를 문의하려고
⑤ 수영장 대여 취소에 따른 환불을 요청하려고
19. 다음 글에 나타난 Jessica의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
The island tour bus Jessica was riding on was moving slowly 
toward the ocean cliffs. Outside, the sky was getting dark. 
Jessica sighed with concern, “I’m going to miss the sunset 
because of the traffic.” The bus arrived at the cliffs’ parking lot. 
While the other passengers were gathering their bags, Jessica 
quickly got off the bus and she ran up the cliff that was famous 
for its ocean views. She was about to give up when she got to the 
top. Just then she saw the setting sun and it still shone brightly in 
the sky. Jessica said to herself, “The glow of the sun is so beautiful. 
It’s even better than I expected.”
① worried → delighted
② bored → confident
③ relieved → annoyed
④ joyful → indifferent
⑤ regretful → depressed
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Consider two athletes who both want to play in college. One 
says she has to work very hard and the other uses goal setting to 
create a plan to stay on track and work on specific skills where 
she is lacking. Both are working hard but only the latter is 
working smart. It can be frustrating for athletes to work extremely 
hard but not make the progress they wanted. What can make the 
difference is drive ― utilizing the mental gear to maximize 
gains made in the technical and physical areas. Drive provides 
direction (goals), sustains effort (motivation), and creates a 
training mindset that goes beyond simply working hard. Drive 
applies direct force on your physical and technical gears, 
strengthening and polishing them so they can spin with vigor 
and purpose. While desire might make you spin those gears 
faster and harder as you work out or practice, drive is what built 
them in the first place.
* vigor: 활력, 활기
① 선수들의 훈련 방식은 장점을 극대화하는 방향으로 이루어져야 한다.
② 선수들은 최고의 성과를 얻기 위해 정신적 추진력을 잘 활용해야 한다.
③ 선수들은 단기적 훈련 성과보다 장기적 목표 달성에 힘써야 한다.
④ 선수들은 육체적 훈련과 정신적 훈련을 균형 있게 병행해야 한다.
⑤ 선수들은 수립한 계획을 실행하면서 꾸준히 수정하여야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
21. 밑줄 친 “view from nowhere”가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 
가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Our view of the world is not given to us from the outside in 
a pure, objective form; it is shaped by our mental abilities, our 
shared cultural perspectives and our unique values and beliefs. 
This is not to say that there is no reality outside our minds or 
that the world is just an illusion. It is to say that our version of 
reality is precisely that: our version, not the version. There is 
no single, universal or authoritative version that makes sense, 
other than as a theoretical construct. We can see the world only 
as it appears to us, not “as it truly is,” because there is no “as it 
truly is” without a perspective to give it form. Philosopher 
Thomas Nagel argued that there is no “view from nowhere,” 
since we cannot see the world except from a particular 
perspective, and that perspective influences what we see. We 
can experience the world only through the human lenses that 
make it intelligible to us.
* illusion: 환영
① perception of reality affected by subjective views
② valuable perspective most people have in mind
③ particular view adopted by very few people
④ critical insight that defeats our prejudices
⑤ unbiased and objective view of the world
22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Often overlooked, but just as important a stakeholder, is the 
consumer who plays a large role in the notion of the privacy 
paradox. Consumer engagement levels in all manner of digital 
experiences and communities have simply exploded ― and they 
show little or no signs of slowing. There is an awareness among 
consumers, not only that their personal data helps to drive the 
rich experiences that these companies provide, but also that 
sharing this data is the price you pay for these experiences, in 
whole or in part. Without a better understanding of the what, 
when, and why of data collection and use, the consumer is often 
left feeling vulnerable and conflicted. “I love this restaurant-finder 
app on my phone, but what happens to my data if I press ‘ok’ 
when asked if that app can use my current location?” Armed 
with tools that can provide them options, the consumer moves 
from passive bystander to active participant.
* stakeholder: 이해관계자
** vulnerable: 상처를 입기 쉬운
① 개인정보 제공의 속성을 심층적으로 이해하면 주체적 소비자가 된다.
② 소비자는 디지털 시대에 유용한 앱을 적극 활용하는 자세가 필요하다.
③ 현명한 소비자가 되려면 다양한 디지털 데이터를 활용해야 한다.
④ 기업의 디지털 서비스를 이용하면 상응하는 대가가 뒤따른다.
⑤ 타인과의 정보 공유로 인해 개인정보가 유출되기도 한다.
23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Considerable work by cultural psychologists and anthropologists 
has shown that there are indeed large and sometimes surprising 
differences in the words and concepts that different cultures have 
for describing emotions, as well as in the social circumstances 
that draw out the expression of particular emotions. However, 
those data do not actually show that different cultures have 
different emotions, if we think of emotions as central, neurally 
implemented states. As for, say, color vision, they just say that, 
despite the same internal processing architecture, how we 
interpret, categorize, and name emotions varies according to 
culture and that we learn in a particular culture the social context 
in which it is appropriate to express emotions. However, the 
emotional states themselves are likely to be quite invariant 
across cultures. In a sense, we can think of a basic, culturally 
universal emotion set that is shaped by evolution and implemented 
in the brain, but the links between such emotional states and 
stimuli, behavior, and other cognitive states are plastic and can 
be modified by learning in a specific cultural context.
* anthropologist: 인류학자
** stimuli: 자극
*** cognitive: 인지적인
① essential links between emotions and behaviors 
② culturally constructed representation of emotions
③ falsely described emotions through global languages
④ universally defined emotions across academic disciplines
⑤ wider influence of cognition on learning cultural contexts
24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
The approach, joint cognitive systems, treats a robot as part of 
a human-machine team where the intelligence is synergistic, 
arising from the contributions of each agent. The team consists 
of at least one robot and one human and is often called a mixed 
team because it is a mixture of human and robot agents. 
Self-driving cars, where a person turns on and off the driving, is 
an example of a joint cognitive system. Entertainment robots are 
examples of mixed teams as are robots for telecommuting. The 
design process concentrates on how the agents will cooperate 
and coordinate with each other to accomplish the team goals. 
Rather than treating robots as peer agents with their own 
completely independent agenda, joint cognitive systems 
approaches treat robots as helpers such as service animals or sheep 
dogs. In joint cognitive system designs, artificial intelligence is 
used along with human-robot interaction principles to create 
robots that can be intelligent enough to be good team members.
① Better Together: Human and Machine Collaboration
② Can Robots Join Forces to Outperform Human Teams?
③ Loss of Humanity in the Human and Machine Conflict
④ Power Off: When and How to Say No to Robot Partners
⑤ Shifting from Service Animals to Robot Assistants of Humans
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Resident Patent Applications per Million Population 
for the Top 6 Origins, in 2009 and in 2019
2009
Rank
Origin
Resident patent 
applications per 
million population
1
Republic of 
Korea
2,582
2
Japan
2,306
3
Switzerland
975
4
Germany
891
5
U.S.
733
6
Finland
609
2019
Rank
Origin
Resident patent 
applications per 
million population 
1
Republic of 
Korea
3,319
2
Japan
1,943
3
Switzerland
1,122
4
China
890
5
Germany
884
6
U.S.
869
Note: The top 6 origins were included if they had a population greater than 
5 million and if they had more than 100 resident patent applications.
The above tables show the resident patent applications per 
million population for the top 6 origins in 2009 and in 2019. 
① The Republic of Korea, Japan, and Switzerland, the top three 
origins in 2009, maintained their rankings in 2019. ② Germany, 
which sat fourth on the 2009 list with 891 resident patent 
applications per million population, fell to fifth place on the 
2019 list with 884 resident patent applications per million 
population. ③ The U.S. fell from fifth place on the 2009 list 
to sixth place on the 2019 list, showing a decrease in the 
number of resident patent applications per million population.
④ Among the top 6 origins which made the list in 2009, 
Finland was the only origin which did not make it again in 
2019. ⑤ On the other hand, China, which did not make the 
list of the top 6 origins in 2009, sat fourth on the 2019 list with 
890 resident patent applications per million population.
26. William Buckland에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
William Buckland (1784—1856) was well known as one of 
the greatest geologists in his time. His birthplace, Axminster in 
Britain, was rich with fossils, and as a child, he naturally became 
interested in fossils while collecting them. In 1801, Buckland 
won a scholarship and was admitted to Corpus Christi College, 
Oxford. He developed his scientific knowledge there while 
attending John Kidd’s lectures on mineralogy and chemistry. 
After Kidd resigned his position, Buckland was appointed his 
successor at the college. Buckland used representative samples 
and large-scale geological maps in his lectures, which made his 
lectures more lively. In 1824, he announced the discovery of the 
bones of a giant creature, and he named it Megalosaurus, or 
‘great lizard’. He won the prize from the Geological Society 
due to his achievements in geology.
① 태어난 곳은 화석이 풍부하였다.
② John Kidd의 강의를 들으며 자신의 과학 지식을 발전시켰다.
③ John Kidd의 사임 전에 그의 후임자로 임명되었다.
④ 자신의 강의에서 대축척 지질학 지도를 사용하였다.
⑤ 1824년에 거대 생물 뼈의 발견을 발표하였다.
27. 2022 Sunbay High School Benefit Concert에 관한 다음 
안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
① 수익금 전액은 지역 아동 병원에 기부될 것이다.
② Sunbay 고등학교의 Vision Hall에서 열린다.
③ Sunbay 고등학교를 졸업한 가수의 특별 공연이 있다.
④ 티켓은 오후 5시부터 살 수 있다. 
⑤ 동아리 학생들의 전시 작품은 구입이 가능하다.
28. Shooting Star Viewing Event에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
일치하는 것은?
① 현장 등록이 가능하다.
② 참가 인원에 제한이 없다.
③ 참가자들은 오후 9시에 홀에서 모여 옥상으로 이동할 것이다.
④ 기상 상황으로 인한 행사 취소 시 문자 메시지로 공지될 것이다.
⑤ 외부 음식과 음료는 허용된다.
2022 Sunbay High School Benefit Concert
Sunbay High School students will be holding their benefit 
concert for charity. All profits will be donated to the local 
children’s hospital. Come and enjoy your family and friends’ 
performances. 
Date & Time: Thursday, June 30, 2022 at 6 p.m.
Place: Sunbay High School’s Vision Hall
Events
∙singing, dancing, drumming, and other musical performances
∙special performance by singer Jonas Collins, who graduated 
from Sunbay High School
Tickets
∙$3 per person 
∙available to buy from 5 p.m. at the front desk of Vision Hall
Other Attractions 
∙club students’ artwork on display, but not for purchase
∙free face-painting
For more information about the concert, feel free to contact 
us at concert@sunbayhighs.edu.
Shooting Star Viewing Event
Would you like to watch the rare shooting star, coming on 
Sunday, July 24? The Downtown Central Science Museum 
is the perfect spot to catch the vivid view!
Registration
∙Online only ― www.dcsm.org
∙From July l to July 14
∙The number of participants will be limited to 50.
Schedule on July 24
∙8:00 p.m.: Participants will gather at the hall and then move 
to the rooftop.
∙8:30 p.m.: Guides will explain how to observe the shooting 
star.
∙9:00 p.m.—11:00 p.m.: We will share the experience of the 
shooting star.
Notes
∙If the event is cancelled due to the weather conditions, 
notice will be given via text message.
∙Outside food and drinks are not allowed.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? [3점]
Ecosystems differ in composition and extent. They can be 
defined as ranging from the communities and interactions of 
organisms in your mouth or ① those in the canopy of a rain forest 
to all those in Earth’s oceans. The processes ② governing them 
differ in complexity and speed. There are systems that turn over 
in minutes, and there are others ③ which rhythmic time 
extends to hundreds of years. Some ecosystems are extensive 
(‘biomes’, such as the African savanna); some cover regions (river 
basins); many involve clusters of villages (micro-watersheds); 
others are confined to the level of a single village (the village 
pond). In each example there is an element of indivisibility. 
Divide an ecosystem into parts by creating barriers, and the sum 
of the productivity of the parts will typically be found to be 
lower than the productivity of the whole, other things ④ being 
equal. The mobility of biological populations is a reason. Safe 
passages, for example, enable migratory species ⑤ to survive.
* canopy: 덮개
** basin: 유역
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
않은 것은?
In recent years urban transport professionals globally have 
largely acquiesced to the view that automobile demand in 
cities needs to be managed rather than accommodated. Rising 
incomes inevitably lead to increases in motorization. Even 
without the imperative of climate change, the physical constraints 
of densely inhabited cities and the corresponding demands of 
accessibility, mobility, safety, air pollution, and urban livability 
all ① limit the option of expanding road networks purely to 
accommodate this rising demand. As a result, as cities develop 
and their residents become more prosperous, ② persuading 
people to choose not to use cars becomes an increasingly key 
focus of city managers and planners. Improving the quality of
③ alternative options, such as walking, cycling, and public 
transport, is a central element of this strategy. However, the 
most direct approach to ④ accommodating automobile demand 
is making motorized travel more expensive or restricting it 
with administrative rules. The contribution of motorized travel 
to climate change ⑤ reinforces this imperative.
* acquiesce: 따르다
** imperative: 불가피한 것
*** constraint: 압박
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. Young contemporary artists who employ digital technologies 
in their practice rarely make reference to computers. For example, 
Wade Guyton, an abstractionist who uses a word processing 
program and inkjet printers, does not call himself a computer 
artist. Moreover, some critics, who admire his work, are little 
concerned about his extensive use of computers in the 
art-making process. This is a marked contrast from three 
decades ago when artists who utilized computers were labeled 
by critics ― often disapprovingly ― as computer artists. For the 
present generation of artists, the computer, or more appropriately, 
the laptop, is one in a collection of integrated, portable digital 
technologies that link their social and working life. With tablets 
and cell phones surpassing personal computers in Internet 
usage, and as slim digital devices resemble nothing like the 
room-sized mainframes and bulky desktop computers of 
previous decades, it now appears that the computer artist is 
finally 
.
① awake
② influential
③ distinct
④ troublesome 
⑤ extinct
32. The critic who wants to write about literature from a formalist 
perspective must first be a close and careful reader who examines 
all the elements of a text individually and questions how they 
come together to create a work of art. Such a reader, who 
respects the autonomy of a work, achieves an understanding of it 
by 
. Instead 
of examining historical periods, author biographies, or literary 
styles, for example, he or she will approach a text with the 
assumption that it is a self-contained entity and that he or she 
is looking for the governing principles that allow the text to 
reveal itself. For example, the correspondences between the 
characters in James Joyce’s short story “Araby” and the people 
he knew personally may be interesting, but for the formalist 
they are less relevant to understanding how the story creates 
meaning than are other kinds of information that the story 
contains within itself.
* entity: 실체
① putting himself or herself both inside and outside it
② finding a middle ground between it and the world
③ searching for historical realities revealed within it
④ looking inside it, not outside it or beyond it
⑤ exploring its characters’ cultural relevance
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. Manufacturers design their innovation processes around 
the way they think the process works. The vast majority of 
manufacturers still think that product development and service 
development are always done by manufacturers, and that 
their job is always to find a need and fill it rather than to 
sometimes find and commercialize an innovation that 
. Accordingly, manufacturers 
have set up market-research departments to explore the needs 
of users in the target market, product-development groups to 
think up suitable products to address those needs, and so forth. 
The needs and prototype solutions of lead users ― if 
encountered at all ― are typically rejected as outliers of no 
interest. Indeed, when lead users’ innovations do enter a firm’s 
product line ― and they have been shown to be the actual 
source of many major innovations for many firms ― they 
typically arrive with a lag and by an unusual and unsystematic 
route. [3점]
* lag: 지연
① lead users tended to overlook
② lead users have already developed
③ lead users encountered in the market
④ other firms frequently put into use
⑤ both users and firms have valued
34. Development can get very complicated and fanciful. A 
fugue by Johann Sebastian Bach illustrates how far this process 
could go, when a single melodic line, sometimes just a handful 
of notes, was all that the composer needed to create a brilliant 
work containing lots of intricate development within a coherent 
structure. Ludwig van Beethoven’s famous Fifth Symphony 
provides an exceptional example of how much mileage a classical 
composer can get out of a few notes and a simple rhythmic tapping. 
The opening da-da-da-DUM that everyone has heard somewhere 
or another 
 
throughout not only the opening movement, but the remaining 
three movements, like a kind of motto or a connective thread. 
Just as we don’t always see the intricate brushwork that goes 
into the creation of a painting, we may not always notice how 
Beethoven keeps finding fresh uses for his motto or how he 
develops his material into a large, cohesive statement. But a lot 
of the enjoyment we get from that mighty symphony stems from 
the inventiveness behind it, the impressive development of 
musical ideas. [3점]
* intricate: 복잡한
** coherent: 통일성 있는
① makes the composer’s musical ideas contradictory
② appears in an incredible variety of ways
③ provides extensive musical knowledge creatively
④ remains fairly calm within the structure
⑤ becomes deeply associated with one’s own enjoyment
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
The animal in a conflict between attacking a rival and fleeing 
may initially not have sufficient information to enable it to 
make a decision straight away. ① If the rival is likely to win the 
fight, then the optimal decision would be to give up immediately 
and not risk getting injured. ② But if the rival is weak and 
easily defeatable, then there could be considerable benefit in 
going ahead and obtaining the territory, females, food or whatever 
is at stake. ③ Animals under normal circumstances maintain a 
very constant body weight and they eat and drink enough for 
their needs at regular intervals. ④ By taking a little extra time to 
collect information about the opponent, the animal is more 
likely to reach a decision that maximizes its chances of winning 
than if it takes a decision without such information. ⑤ Many 
signals are now seen as having this information gathering or 
‘assessment’ function, directly contributing to the mechanism 
of the decision-making process by supplying vital information 
about the likely outcomes of the various options.
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
The fossil record provides evidence of evolution. The 
story the fossils tell is one of change. Creatures existed in 
the past that are no longer with us. Sequential changes are 
found in many fossils showing the change of certain features 
over time from a common ancestor, as in the case of the 
horse.
(A) If multicelled organisms were indeed found to have evolved 
before single-celled organisms, then the theory of evolution 
would be rejected. A good scientific theory always allows 
for the possibility of rejection. The fact that we have not 
found such a case in countless examinations of the fossil 
record strengthens the case for evolutionary theory.
(B) The fossil record supports this prediction ―multicelled 
organisms are found in layers of earth millions of years 
after the first appearance of single-celled organisms. Note 
that the possibility always remains that the opposite could 
be found. 
(C) Apart from demonstrating that evolution did occur, the 
fossil record also provides tests of the predictions made 
from evolutionary theory. For example, the theory predicts 
that single-celled organisms evolved before multicelled 
organisms.
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
In economics, there is a principle known as the sunk cost 
fallacy. The idea is that when you are invested and have 
ownership in something, you overvalue that thing. 
(A) Sometimes, the smartest thing a person can do is quit. 
Although this is true, it has also become a tired and 
played-out argument. Sunk cost doesn’t always have to be 
a bad thing. 
(B) This leads people to continue on paths or pursuits that 
should clearly be abandoned. For example, people often 
remain in terrible relationships simply because they’ve 
invested a great deal of themselves into them. Or someone 
may continue pouring money into a business that is 
clearly a bad idea in the market. 
(C) Actually, you can leverage this human tendency to your 
benefit. Like someone invests a great deal of money in a 
personal trainer to ensure they follow through on their 
commitment, you, too, can invest a great deal up front to 
ensure you stay on the path you want to be on. [3점]
* leverage: 이용하다
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
Also, it has become difficult for companies to develop new 
pesticides, even those that can have major beneficial effects 
and few negative effects.
Simply maintaining yields at current levels often requires new 
cultivars and management methods, since pests and diseases 
continue to evolve, and aspects of the chemical, physical, and 
social environment can change over several decades. ( ① ) In 
the 1960s, many people considered pesticides to be mainly 
beneficial to mankind. ( ② ) Developing new, broadly effective, 
and persistent pesticides often was considered to be the best way 
to control pests on crop plants. ( ③ ) Since that time, it has 
become apparent that broadly effective pesticides can have 
harmful effects on beneficial insects, which can negate their 
effects in controlling pests, and that persistent pesticides can 
damage non-target organisms in the ecosystem, such as birds 
and people. ( ④ ) Very high costs are involved in following all 
of the procedures needed to gain government approval for new 
pesticides. ( ⑤ ) Consequently, more consideration is being 
given to other ways to manage pests, such as incorporating 
greater resistance to pests into cultivars by breeding and using 
other biological control methods.
* pesticide: 살충제
** cultivar: 품종
*** breed: 개량하다
39.
This makes sense from the perspective of information 
reliability. 
The dynamics of collective detection have an interesting 
feature. Which cue(s) do individuals use as evidence of 
predator attack? In some cases, when an individual detects a 
predator, its best response is to seek shelter. ( ① ) Departure 
from the group may signal danger to nonvigilant animals and 
cause what appears to be a coordinated flushing of prey 
from the area. ( ② ) Studies on dark-eyed juncos (a type of 
bird) support the view that nonvigilant animals attend to 
departures of individual group mates but that the departure of 
multiple individuals causes a greater escape response in the 
nonvigilant individuals. ( ③ ) If one group member departs, 
it might have done so for a number of reasons that have little to 
do with predation threat. ( ④ ) If nonvigilant animals escaped 
each time a single member left the group, they would 
frequently respond when there was no predator (a false 
alarm). ( ⑤ ) On the other hand, when several individuals 
depart the group at the same time, a true threat is much more 
likely to be present. [3점]
* predator: 포식자
** vigilant: 경계하는
*** flushing: 날아오름
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), 
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Mobilities in transit offer a broad field to be explored by 
different disciplines in all faculties, in addition to the 
humanities. In spite of increasing acceleration, for example 
in travelling through geographical or virtual space, our body 
becomes more and more a passive non-moving container, 
which is transported by artefacts or loaded up with inner 
feelings of being mobile in the so-called information society. 
Technical mobilities turn human beings into some kind of 
terminal creatures, who spend most of their time at rest and 
who need to participate in sports in order to balance their 
daily disproportion of motion and rest. Have we come 
closer to Aristotle’s image of God as the immobile mover, 
when elites exercise their power to move money, things 
and people, while they themselves do not need to move at 
all? Others, at the bottom of this power, are victims of 
mobility-structured social exclusion. They cannot decide 
how and where to move, but are just moved around or 
locked out or even locked in without either the right to 
move or the right to stay.
󰀻
In a technology and information society, human beings, 
whose bodily movement is less 
(A)
, appear to 
have gained increased mobility and power, and such a 
mobility-related human condition raises the issue of social 
(B)
.
(A)
(B)
(A)
(B)
① necessary……inequality
② necessary……growth
③ limited
……consciousness
④ desirable ……service
⑤ desirable ……divide
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Once an event is noticed, an onlooker must decide if it is truly 
an emergency. Emergencies are not always clearly (a) labeled 
as such; “smoke” pouring into a waiting room may be caused 
by fire, or it may merely indicate a leak in a steam pipe. 
Screams in the street may signal an attack or a family quarrel. 
A man lying in a doorway may be having a coronary ― or he 
may simply be sleeping off a drunk.
A person trying to interpret a situation often looks at those 
around him to see how he should react. If everyone else is 
calm and indifferent, he will tend to remain so; if everyone 
else is reacting strongly, he is likely to become alert. This 
tendency is not merely blind conformity; ordinarily we derive 
much valuable information about new situations from how 
others around us behave. It’s a (b) rare traveler who, in 
picking a roadside restaurant, chooses to stop at one where 
no other cars appear in the parking lot. 
But occasionally the reactions of others provide (c) accurate 
information. The studied nonchalance of patients in a dentist’s 
waiting room is a poor indication of their inner anxiety. It is 
considered embarrassing to “lose your cool” in public. In a 
potentially acute situation, then, everyone present will appear 
more (d) unconcerned than he is in fact. A crowd can thus 
force (e) inaction on its members by implying, through its 
passivity, that an event is not an emergency. Any individual 
in such a crowd fears that he may appear a fool if he behaves 
as though it were.
* coronary: 관상 동맥증
** nonchalance: 무관심, 냉담
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Do We Judge Independently? The Effect of Crowds
② Winning Strategy: How Not to Be Fooled by Others
③ Do Emergencies Affect the Way of Our Thinking?
④ Stepping Towards Harmony with Your Neighbors
⑤ Ways of Helping Others in Emergent Situations
42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 
것은?
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e) 
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
It was the first day of the semester. Looking around his 
shared dorm room, Noah thought that it looked exactly like 
every other dorm room at the university, and he became 
disappointed. His roommate Steve noticed it and asked what 
was wrong. Noah answered quietly that he thought their room 
was totally boring. (a) He wished the space felt a bit more like 
their space. Steve agreed and suggested that they could start 
personalizing the room like Noah wanted, the next day.
(B)
As they walked through a furniture store, Steve found a 
pretty yellow table. Since he knew that yellow was Noah’s 
favorite color, Steve asked (b) him what he thought about 
buying that table. Noah was happy about the yellow table and 
said it would make their room more unique. Delighted, Noah 
added, “Well, yesterday our room was just like any other 
place at this school. But after today, (c) I really feel like it’ll 
be our place.” Now, they both knew that the place would 
provide them with energy and refreshment.
(C)
Noah hardly slept that night making plans for the room. 
After Steve woke up, they started to rearrange the furniture. 
All of the chairs and the sofa in their room were facing the TV. 
Noah mentioned to Steve that most of their visitors usually just 
sat and watched TV instead of chatting. In response to (d) his 
idea, Steve suggested, “How about we put the sofa over there 
by the wall so it will be easier to have conversations?” Noah 
agreed, and they moved it by the wall.
(D)
After changing the place of the sofa, they could see that 
they now had a lot of space in the middle of their room. 
Then, Noah remembered that his brother Sammy had a big 
table in his living room for playing board games and told 
Steve about it. Steve and Noah both really enjoyed playing 
board games. So, Steve replied to Noah, “(e) I think putting a 
table in the middle of our room would be great for drinking 
tea as well as playing board games!” Both Noah and Steve 
agreed and decided to go shopping for a table. 
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)
② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
것은?
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Noah는 학기 첫날 자신의 기숙사 방을 둘러보고 실망했다.
② Noah는 노란색 탁자가 자신들의 방을 더 독특하게 만들 것이라고 말했다.
③ Noah는 Steve가 잠든 사이에 가구를 다시 배치했다. 
④ Noah는 Sammy의 거실에 커다란 탁자가 있던 것을 떠올렸다.
⑤ Noah와 Steve 둘 다 보드게임 하는 것을 즐겼다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
