1
8
  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 다음을 듣고, 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
① 비상 시 대피 장소를 안내하려고
② 버스 출발 시간 변경을 공지하려고
③ 차량 운행 중 안전벨트 착용을 당부하려고
④ 버스 내 휴대 전화 통화 자제를 요청하려고
⑤ 차량 내 무선 인터넷 연결 방법을 설명하려고
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 라디오를 듣는 것은 행복감을 높여 준다.
② 인터넷 발달은 라디오의 대중화에 기여한다.
③ 노년층을 위한 멀티미디어 교육이 필요하다.
④ 대화할 때는 상대방의 말을 경청하는 것이 중요하다.
⑤ 라디오 프로그램 편성 시 청취 연령을 고려해야 한다.
3. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 건축가 － 건물 주인
② 코딩 강사 － 수강생
③ 영양사 － 과일 도매상
④ 음식 평론가 － 요리사
⑤ 홍보 회사 직원－ 과일 농장 주인
4. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
5. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 현수막 걸기
② 의자 배치하기
③ 카메라 설치하기
④ 디제이 일정 조율하기
⑤ 마이크 상태 확인하기
6. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점]
① $45
② $54
③ $63
④ $65
⑤ $70
7. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 밴드 오디션에 참가하지 않은 이유를 
고르시오.
① 기타에 문제가 생겨서
② 몸 상태가 좋지 않아서
③ 졸업 시험을 치러야 해서
④ 취업 면접 일정과 겹쳐서
⑤ 가족 행사에 참여해야 해서
8. 대화를 듣고, Kint Chocolate Museum에 관해 언급되지 않은 
것을 고르시오.
① 위치
② 개관 시간
③ 입장료
④ 선물 가게
⑤ 휴관일
9. Endangered Animals Photo Exhibition에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 
일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
① 3주 동안 지속된다.
② 멸종 위기 동물들의 사진 100장이 전시된다.
③ 사진 속 동물들이 멸종 위기에 처한 이유가 설명되어 있다.
④ 수익금 전액은 동물 보호 센터에 기부될 것이다.
⑤ 멸종 위기 동물 포스터를 무료로 제공할 것이다.
10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 주문할 기내 휴대용 
가방을 고르시오.
Carry-On Bags for Kids
Model
Price
Height
(inches)
Color
Material
①
A
$35
14
Red
Plastic
②
B
$50
16
Blue
Plastic
③
C
$70
16
Pink
Fabric
④
D
$95
18
Black
Fabric
⑤
E
$110
18
Purple
Aluminum
11. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sorry. I broke the bottles by accident.
② Sure. Let’s remove the labels together.
③ You shouldn’t. Your hands are still dirty.
④ I agree. Recycled paper bags are cheaper.
⑤ No problem. I’m going to order some bottles.
12. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Sounds wonderful! That fits our budget.
② Terrific! I’m glad we’re done with the project.
③ Too bad. There’s no ticket available for your trip.
④ Okay. I’ll reschedule the meeting and let you know.
⑤ Thanks for offering. I’ll be happy to join your team.
2023학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
1
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
2
2
8
13. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
① Of course. I accept the instructor position.
② Great. Let me sign up for the 8 p.m. class, then.
③ Please write your name down on the waiting list.
④ Thanks for the refund of my class registration fee.
⑤ Sounds exciting. Good luck on your ballet performance.
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Man:
① Thanks for telling me. I’ll call her and apologize.
② Good idea. Don’t forget to bring your tennis shoes.
③ Not really. The match wasn’t as good as I expected.
④ Fine. Promise me you’ll do your best to win the match.
⑤ I understand. I’ll give you more time to finish the series.
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Randy가 Angela에게 할 말로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Randy:
① Why don’t you find members to form a drone racing club?
② I think you should become friends with the transfer student.
③ Practice more if you want to participate in the next race.
④ Safety comes first when it comes to flying drones.
⑤ How about buying a drone of your own?
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
① positive effects of plants on insects
② diverse purposes of plant communication
③ different methods for controlling toxic chemicals
④ key aspects of non-verbal human communication
⑤ important roles of plants in balancing the food chain
17. 언급된 식물이 아닌 것은?
① cotton plants
② mustard plants
③ pine trees
④ tomato plants
⑤ walnut trees
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Natalie Talley,
My name is Olivia Spikes, the mayor of Millstown. Before you 
attend the world championships next month, on behalf of 
everyone in Millstown, I wish to let you know that we are 
supporting you all the way. As you are the first famous figure 
skater from Millstown, we are all big fans of yours. Our 
community was so proud of you for winning the national 
championships last year. Your amazing performance really 
moved us all. We all believe that you are going to impress the 
entire nation again. Your hometown supporters will cheer for 
you whenever you perform on the ice. Good luck!
Best wishes,
Olivia Spikes
① 지역 사회 홍보 대사로 활동해 줄 것을 제안하려고
② 이웃 도시와 예정된 친선 경기 취소를 통보하려고
③ 지역 사회 출신 피겨 스케이팅 선수를 응원하려고
④ 시청에서 주관하는 연례 자선 행사를 홍보하려고
⑤ 피겨 스케이팅 경기장 건립을 위한 기부를 요청하려고
19. 다음 글에 드러난 Nathan의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
“Daddy!” Jenny called, waving a yellow crayon in her little 
hand. Nathan approached her, wondering why she was calling 
him. Jenny, his three-year-old toddler, was drawing a big circle 
on a piece of paper. “What are you doing, Sweetie?” Nathan 
asked with interest. She just kept drawing without reply. He 
continued watching her, wondering what she was working on. 
She was drawing something that looked like a face. When she 
finished it, Jenny shouted, “Look, Daddy!” She held her artwork 
up proudly. Taking a closer look, Nathan recognized that it was 
his face. The face had two big eyes and a beard just like his. He 
loved Jenny’s work. Filled with joy and happiness, Nathan gave 
her a big hug. 
* toddler: 아장아장 걷는 아이
① sorrowful → relieved
② frustrated → satisfied
③ worried
→ scared
④ curious
→ delighted
⑤ hopeful
→ disappointed
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Becoming competent in another culture means looking 
beyond behavior to see if we can understand the attitudes, 
beliefs, and values that motivate what we observe. By looking 
only at the visible aspects of culture ― customs, clothing, 
food, and language ― we develop a short-sighted view of 
intercultural understanding ― just the tip of the iceberg, really. 
If we are to be successful in our business interactions with 
people who have different values and beliefs about how the 
world is ordered, then we must go below the surface of what it 
means to understand culture and attempt to see what Edward 
Hall calls the “hidden dimensions.” Those hidden aspects are 
the very foundation of culture and are the reason why culture 
is actually more than meets the eye. We tend not to notice 
those cultural norms until they violate what we consider to be 
common sense, good judgment, or the nature of things.
① 타 문화 사람들과 교류를 잘하려면 그 문화의 이면을 알아야 한다.
② 문화 배경이 다른 직원과 협업할 때 공정하게 업무를 나눠야 한다.
③ 여러 문화에 대한 이해를 통해 공동체 의식을 길러야 한다.
④ 원만한 대인 관계를 위해서는 서로의 공통점을 우선 파악해야 한다.
⑤ 문화적 갈등을 줄이려면 구성원 간의 소통을 활성화해야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
3
3
8
21. 밑줄 친 send us off into different far corners of the library가 
다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
You may feel there is something scary about an algorithm 
deciding what you might like. Could it mean that, if computers 
conclude you won’t like something, you will never get the 
chance to see it? Personally, I really enjoy being directed 
toward new music that I might not have found by myself. I can 
quickly get stuck in a rut where I put on the same songs over 
and over. That’s why I’ve always enjoyed the radio. But the 
algorithms that are now pushing and pulling me through the 
music library are perfectly suited to finding gems that I’ll like. 
My worry originally about such algorithms was that they 
might drive everyone into certain parts of the library, leaving 
others lacking listeners. Would they cause a convergence of 
tastes? But thanks to the nonlinear and chaotic mathematics 
usually behind them, this doesn’t happen. A small divergence 
in my likes compared to yours can send us off into different 
far corners of the library.
* rut: 관습, 틀
** gem: 보석
*** divergence: 갈라짐
① lead us to music selected to suit our respective tastes
② enable us to build connections with other listeners
③ encourage us to request frequent updates for algorithms
④ motivate us to search for talented but unknown musicians
⑤ make us ignore our preferences for particular music genres
22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Historically, drafters of tax legislation are attentive to questions 
of economics and history, and less attentive to moral questions. 
Questions of morality are often pushed to the side in legislative 
debate, labeled too controversial, too difficult to answer, or, 
worst of all, irrelevant to the project. But, in fact, the moral 
questions of taxation are at the very heart of the creation of tax 
laws. Rather than irrelevant, moral questions are fundamental 
to the imposition of tax. Tax is the application of a society’s 
theories of distributive justice. Economics can go a long way 
towards helping a legislature determine whether or not a 
particular tax law will help achieve a particular goal, but 
economics cannot, in a vacuum, identify the goal. Creating tax 
policy requires identifying a moral goal, which is a task that 
must involve ethics and moral analysis.
* legislation: 입법
** imposition: 부과
① 분배 정의를 실현하려면 시민 단체의 역할이 필요하다.
② 사회적 합의는 민주적인 정책 수립의 선행 조건이다.
③ 성실한 납세는 안정적인 정부 예산 확보의 기반이 된다.
④ 경제학은 세법을 개정할 때 이론적 근거를 제공한다.
⑤ 세법을 만들 때 도덕적 목표를 설정하는 것이 중요하다.
23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
Environmental learning occurs when farmers base decisions 
on observations of “payoff” information. They may observe 
their own or neighbors’ farms, but it is the empirical results they 
are using as a guide, not the neighbors themselves. They are 
looking at farming activities as experiments and assessing such 
factors as relative advantage, compatibility with existing 
resources, difficulty of use, and “trialability” ― how well can it 
be experimented with. But that criterion of “trialability” turns 
out to be a real problem; it’s true that farmers are always 
experimenting, but working farms are very flawed laboratories. 
Farmers cannot set up the controlled conditions of professional 
test plots in research facilities. Farmers also often confront 
complex and difficult-to-observe phenomena that would be 
hard to manage even if they could run controlled experiments. 
Moreover farmers can rarely acquire payoff information on 
more than a few of the production methods they might use, 
which makes the criterion of “relative advantage” hard to measure.
* empirical: 경험적인
** compatibility: 양립성
*** criterion: 기준
① limitations of using empirical observations in farming
② challenges in modernizing traditional farming equipment
③ necessity of prioritizing trialability in agricultural innovation
④ importance of making instinctive decisions in agriculture
⑤ ways to control unpredictable agricultural phenomena
24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Not only musicians and psychologists, but also committed 
music enthusiasts and experts often voice the opinion that the 
beauty of music lies in an expressive deviation from the exactly 
defined score. Concert performances become interesting and 
gain in attraction from the fact that they go far beyond the 
information printed in the score. In his early studies on musical 
performance, Carl Seashore discovered that musicians only 
rarely play two equal notes in exactly the same way. Within the 
same metric structure, there is a wide potential of variations in 
tempo, volume, tonal quality and intonation. Such variation is 
based on the composition but diverges from it individually. We 
generally call this ‘expressivity’. This explains why we do not 
lose interest when we hear different artists perform the same 
piece of music. It also explains why it is worthwhile for 
following generations to repeat the same repertoire. New, 
inspiring interpretations help us to expand our understanding, 
which serves to enrich and animate the music scene.
* deviation: 벗어남
① How to Build a Successful Career in Music Criticism
② Never the Same: The Value of Variation in Music Performance
③ The Importance of Personal Expression in Music Therapy
④ Keep Your Cool: Overcoming Stage Fright When Playing Music
⑤ What’s New in the Classical Music Industry?
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
4
4
8
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
The graph above shows the top four European countries 
with the most renewable energy generation capacity in 2011 
and in 2020. ① Each of the four countries in the graph had 
a higher capacity to generate renewable energy in 2020 than 
its respective capacity in 2011. ② Germany’s capacity to generate 
renewable energy in 2011 reached more than 50.0 gigawatts, 
which was also the case in 2020. ③ Among the countries 
above, Spain ranked in second place in terms of renewable 
energy generation capacity in 2011 and remained in second 
place in 2020. ④ The renewable energy generation capacity 
of Italy in 2020 was lower than that of Spain in the same 
year. ⑤ The renewable energy generation capacity of France 
was higher than that of Italy in both 2011 and 2020.
* decimal: 소수의
26. Leon Festinger에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
Leon Festinger was an American social psychologist. He was 
born in New York City in 1919 to a Russian immigrant family. 
As a graduate student at the University of Iowa, Festinger was 
influenced by Kurt Lewin, a leading social psychologist. After 
graduating from there, he became a professor at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology in 1945. He later moved to Stanford 
University, where he continued his work in social psychology. 
His theory of social comparison earned him a good reputation. 
Festinger actively participated in international scholarly 
cooperation. In the late 1970s, he turned his interest to the field 
of history. He was one of the most cited psychologists of the 
twentieth century. Festinger’s theories still play an important 
role in psychology today.
① 러시아인 이민자 가정에서 태어났다.
② 사회 심리학자 Kurt Lewin에게 영향을 받았다.
③ Stanford University에서 사회 심리학 연구를 중단했다.
④ 국제 학술 협력에 활발하게 참여했다.
⑤ 1970년대 후반에 역사 분야로 관심을 돌렸다.
27. 2022 K-Tea Culture Program에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
일치하지 않는 것은?
① 한국의 차 문화 역사에 관한 영상을 시청한다.
② 한국 전통 다도 시연을 본다.
③ 쿠키와 함께 차를 맛본다.
④ 참가비에는 전통 찻잔이 포함되어 있다.
⑤ 예약은 방문 일주일 전까지 해야 한다.
28. Career Day with a Big Data Expert에 관한 다음 안내문의 
내용과 일치하는 것은?
① 학부모도 참여할 수 있다.
② 참석 인원에 제한이 없다.
③ QR 코드를 스캔하여 신청서를 작성한다.
④ 강연 중에 음료수를 마실 수 있다.
⑤ 참석자 중 일부만 강연자의 책을 무료로 받는다.
2022 K-Tea Culture Program
Evergreen Tea Society invites you to the second annual 
K-Tea Culture Program! Come and enjoy a refreshing cup 
of tea and learn about traditional Korean tea culture.
Program Includes:
1) Watching a short video about the history of Korean tea 
culture
2) Observing a demonstration of a traditional Korean 
tea-ceremony (dado)
3) Participating in the ceremony yourself
4) Tasting a selection of teas along with cookies
When: Saturday, September 24, 3:00 p.m.—5:00 p.m.
Where: Evergreen Culture Center
Participation Fee: $20 per person (traditional teacup included)
Reservations should be made online (www.egtsociety.or.kr)
at least one day before your visit.
Career Day with a Big Data Expert
Meet a Big Data expert from a leading IT company! Jill 
Johnson, famous data analyst and bestselling author, will be 
visiting Sovenhill High School to give a lecture on careers 
related to Big Data.
Participation: 
󰠂 Sovenhill High School students only
󰠂 Limited to 50 students
When & Where:
󰠂 October 15, 10:00 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. 
󰠂 Library
Registration: Scan the QR code to fill in 
the application form.
Note:
󰠂 Drinking beverages is not permitted during the lecture.
󰠂 The lecture will be followed by a Q&A session.
󰠂 All participants will receive a free copy of the lecturer’s 
book.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
5
5
8
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은?
Recognizing ethical issues is the most important step in 
understanding business ethics. An ethical issue is an identifiable 
problem, situation, or opportunity that requires a person to 
choose from among several actions that may ① be evaluated as 
right or wrong, ethical or unethical. ② Learn how to choose 
from alternatives and make a decision requires not only good 
personal values, but also knowledge competence in the business 
area of concern. Employees also need to know when to rely on 
their organizations’ policies and codes of ethics or ③ have 
discussions with co-workers or managers on appropriate 
conduct. Ethical decision making is not always easy because 
there are always gray areas ④ that create dilemmas, no matter 
how decisions are made. For instance, should an employee 
report on a co-worker engaging in time theft? Should a 
salesperson leave out facts about a product’s poor safety record 
in his presentation to a customer? Such questions require the 
decision maker to evaluate the ethics of his or her choice and 
decide ⑤ whether to ask for guidance.
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중, 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
않은 것은?
Although the wonders of modern technology have provided 
people with opportunities beyond the wildest dreams of our 
ancestors, the good, as usual, is weakened by a downside. One 
of those downsides is that anyone who so chooses can pick up 
the virtual megaphone that is the Internet and put in their two 
cents on any of an infinite number of topics, regardless of 
their ① qualifications. After all, on the Internet, there are no 
regulations ② preventing a kindergarten teacher from offering 
medical advice or a physician from suggesting ways to safely 
make structural changes to your home. As a result, misinformation 
gets disseminated as information, and it is not always easy to
③ differentiate the two. This can be particularly frustrating for 
scientists, who spend their lives learning how to understand 
the intricacies of the world around them, only to have their 
work summarily ④ challenged by people whose experience 
with the topic can be measured in minutes. This frustration is 
then ⑤ diminished by the fact that, to the general public, both 
the scientist and the challenger are awarded equal credibility.
* put in one’s two cents: 의견을 말하다
** disseminate: 퍼뜨리다
*** intricacy: 복잡성
[31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
31. More than just having territories, animals also partition 
them. And this insight turned out to be particularly useful for 
zoo husbandry. An animal’s territory has an internal 
arrangement that Heini Hediger compared to the inside of a 
person’s house. Most of us assign separate functions to 
separate rooms, but even if you look at a one-room house 
you will find the same internal specialization. In a cabin or 
a mud hut, or even a Mesolithic cave from 30,000 years ago, 
this part is for cooking, that part is for sleeping; this part is for 
making tools and weaving, that part is for waste. We keep 
. To a varying extent, other 
animals do the same. A part of an animal’s territory is for 
eating, a part for sleeping, a part for swimming or wallowing, 
a part may be set aside for waste, depending on the species of 
animal.
* husbandry: 관리
① an interest in close neighbors
② a neat functional organization
③ a stock of emergency supplies
④ a distance from potential rivals
⑤ a strictly observed daily routine
32. Fans feel for feeling’s own sake. They make meanings 
beyond what seems to be on offer. They build identities and 
experiences, and make artistic creations of their own to share 
with others. A person can be an individual fan, feeling an 
“idealized connection with a star, strong feelings of memory 
and nostalgia,” and engaging in activities like “collecting to 
develop a sense of self.” But, more often, individual 
experiences are embedded in social contexts where other 
people with shared attachments socialize around the object 
of their affections. Much of the pleasure of fandom 
. In their 
diaries, Bostonians of the 1800s described being part of the 
crowds at concerts as part of the pleasure of attendance. A 
compelling argument can be made that what fans love is less 
the object of their fandom than the attachments to (and 
differentiations from) one another that those affections afford.
* embed: 끼워 넣다
** compelling: 강력한
① is enhanced by collaborations between global stars
② results from frequent personal contact with a star
③ deepens as fans age together with their idols
④ comes from being connected to other fans
⑤ is heightened by stars’ media appearances
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
6
6
8
33. There was nothing modern about the idea of men making 
women’s clothes ― we saw them doing it for centuries in the 
past. In the old days, however, the client was always primary 
and her tailor was an obscure craftsman, perhaps talented but 
perhaps not. She had her own ideas like any patron, there were 
no fashion plates, and the tailor was simply at her service, 
perhaps with helpful suggestions about what others were 
wearing. Beginning in the late nineteenth century, with the 
hugely successful rise of the artistic male couturier, it was the 
designer who became celebrated, and the client elevated by his 
inspired attention. In a climate of admiration for male artists and 
their female creations, the dress-designer first flourished as the 
same sort of creator. Instead of the old rule that dressmaking is a 
craft, 
 was 
invented that had not been there before. [3점]
* obscure: 무명의
** patron: 후원자
*** couturier: 고급 여성복 디자이너
① a profitable industry driving fast fashion
② a widespread respect for marketing skills
③ a public institution preserving traditional designs
④ a modern connection between dress-design and art
⑤ an efficient system for producing affordable clothing
34. In trying to explain how different disciplines attempt to 
understand autobiographical memory the literary critic Daniel 
Albright said, “Psychology is a garden, literature is a 
wilderness.” He meant, I believe, that psychology seeks to make 
patterns, find regularity, and ultimately impose order on human 
experience and behavior. Writers, by contrast, dive into the 
unruly, untamed depths of human experiences. What he said 
about understanding memory can be extended to our questions 
about young children’s minds. If we psychologists are too bent 
on identifying the orderly pattern, the regularities of children’s 
minds, we may miss an essential and pervasive characteristic of 
our topic: the child’s more unruly and imaginative ways of 
talking and thinking. It is not only the developed writer or 
literary scholar who seems drawn toward a somewhat wild and 
idiosyncratic way of thinking; young children are as well. The 
psychologist interested in young children may have to 
 in 
order to get a good picture of how children think. [3점]
* unruly: 제멋대로 구는
** pervasive: 널리 퍼져 있는
*** idiosyncratic: 색다른
① venture a little more often into the wilderness
② help them recall their most precious memories
③ better understand the challenges of parental duty
④ disregard the key characteristics of children’s fiction
⑤ standardize the paths of their psychological development
35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장은?
Because plants tend to recover from disasters more quickly 
than animals, they are essential to the revitalization of 
damaged environments. Why do plants have this preferential 
ability to recover from disaster? It is largely because, unlike 
animals, they can generate new organs and tissues throughout 
their life cycle. ① This ability is due to the activity of plant 
meristems ― regions of undifferentiated tissue in roots and 
shoots that can, in response to specific cues, differentiate into 
new tissues and organs. ② If meristems are not damaged 
during disasters, plants can recover and ultimately transform 
the destroyed or barren environment. ③ You can see this 
phenomenon on a smaller scale when a tree struck by lightning 
forms new branches that grow from the old scar. ④ In the form 
of forests and grasslands, plants regulate the cycling of water 
and adjust the chemical composition of the atmosphere. ⑤ In 
addition to regeneration or resprouting of plants, disturbed 
areas can also recover through reseeding.
* revitalization: 소생
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
When two natural bodies of water stand at different levels, 
building a canal between them presents a complicated 
engineering problem. 
(A) Then the upper gates open and the ship passes through. 
For downstream passage, the process works the opposite 
way. The ship enters the lock from the upper level, and 
water is pumped from the lock until the ship is in line 
with the lower level.
(B) When a vessel is going upstream, the upper gates stay 
closed as the ship enters the lock at the lower water level. 
The downstream gates are then closed and more water is 
pumped into the basin. The rising water lifts the vessel to 
the level of the upper body of water.
(C) To make up for the difference in level, engineers build 
one or more water “steps,” called locks, that carry ships 
or boats up or down between the two levels. A lock is an 
artificial water basin. It has a long rectangular shape with 
concrete walls and a pair of gates at each end.
* rectangular: 직사각형의
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
7
7
8
37.
Culture operates in ways we can consciously consider 
and discuss but also in ways of which we are far less 
cognizant.
(A) In some cases, however, we are far less aware of why we 
believe a certain claim to be true, or how we are to 
explain why certain social realities exist. Ideas about the 
social world become part of our worldview without our 
necessarily being aware of the source of the particular 
idea or that we even hold the idea at all.
(B) When we have to offer an account of our actions, we 
consciously understand which excuses might prove 
acceptable, given the particular circumstances we find 
ourselves in. In such situations, we use cultural ideas as 
we would use a particular tool.
(C) We select the cultural notion as we would select a 
screwdriver: certain jobs call for a Phillips head while 
others require an Allen wrench. Whichever idea we insert 
into the conversation to justify our actions, the point is 
that our motives are discursively available to us. They are 
not hidden. [3점]
* cognizant: 인식하는
** discursively: 만연하게
① (A) － (C) － (B)
② (B) － (A) － (C)
③ (B) － (C) － (A)
④ (C) － (A) － (B)
⑤ (C) － (B) － (A)
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
38.
In particular, they define a group as two or more people who 
interact with, and exert mutual influences on, each other.
In everyday life, we tend to see any collection of people as 
a group. ( ① ) However, social psychologists use this term 
more precisely. ( ② ) It is this sense of mutual interaction or 
inter-dependence for a common purpose which distinguishes 
the members of a group from a mere aggregation of 
individuals. ( ③ ) For example, as Kenneth Hodge observed, 
a collection of people who happen to go for a swim after work 
on the same day each week does not, strictly speaking, 
constitute a group because these swimmers do not interact 
with each other in a structured manner. ( ④ ) By contrast, 
a squad of young competitive swimmers who train every morning 
before going to school is a group because they not only share 
a common objective (training for competition) but also interact 
with each other in formal ways (e.g., by warming up together 
beforehand). ( ⑤ ) It is this sense of people coming together 
to achieve a common objective that defines a “team”.
* exert: 발휘하다
** aggregation: 집합
39.
On top of the hurdles introduced in accessing his or her 
money, if a suspected fraud is detected, the account holder 
has to deal with the phone call asking if he or she made 
the suspicious transactions.
Each new wave of technology is intended to enhance user 
convenience, as well as improve security, but sometimes these 
do not necessarily go hand-in-hand. For example, the 
transition from magnetic stripe to embedded chip slightly 
slowed down transactions, sometimes frustrating customers in 
a hurry. ( ① ) Make a service too burdensome, and the potential 
customer will go elsewhere. ( ② ) This obstacle applies at 
several levels. ( ③ ) Passwords, double-key identification, 
and biometrics such as fingerprint-, iris-, and voice recognition 
are all ways of keeping the account details hidden from 
potential fraudsters, of keeping your data dark. ( ④ ) But they 
all inevitably add a burden to the use of the account. ( ⑤ ) This 
is all useful at some level ― indeed, it can be reassuring 
knowing that your bank is keeping alert to protect you ― but 
it becomes tiresome if too many such calls are received. [3점]
* fraud: 사기
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 (A), 
(B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
A striving to demonstrate individual personality through 
designs should not be surprising. Most designers are 
educated to work as individuals, and design literature 
contains countless references to ‘the designer’. Personal 
flair is without doubt an absolute necessity in some product 
categories, particularly relatively small objects, with a low 
degree of technological complexity, such as furniture, 
lighting, small appliances, and housewares. In larger-scale 
projects, however, even where a strong personality exercises 
powerful influence, the fact that substantial numbers of 
designers are employed in implementing a concept can 
easily be overlooked. The emphasis on individuality is 
therefore problematic ― rather than actually designing, 
many successful designer ‘personalities’ function more as 
creative managers. A distinction needs to be made between 
designers working truly alone and those working in a group. 
In the latter case, management organization and processes 
can be equally as relevant as designers’ creativity.
* strive: 애쓰다
** flair: 재능
󰀻
Depending on the
(A)
of a project, the capacity of 
designers to
(B)
team-based working environments 
can be just as important as their personal qualities.
(A)
(B)
(A)
(B)
① size ……coordinate
② cost……systematize
③ size ……identify
④ cost……innovate
⑤ goal……investigate
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
8
8
8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Climate change experts and environmental humanists alike 
agree that the climate crisis is, at its core, a crisis of the 
imagination and much of the popular imagination is shaped by 
fiction. In his 2016 book The Great Derangement, anthropologist 
and novelist Amitav Ghosh takes on this relationship between 
imagination and environmental management, arguing that 
humans have failed to respond to climate change at least in part 
because fiction (a) fails to believably represent it. Ghosh 
explains that climate change is largely absent from 
contemporary fiction because the cyclones, floods, and other 
catastrophes it brings to mind simply seem too “improbable” 
to belong in stories about everyday life. But climate change 
does not only reveal itself as a series of (b) extraordinary 
events. In fact, as environmentalists and ecocritics from Rachel 
Carson to Rob Nixon have pointed out, environmental change 
can be “imperceptible”; it proceeds (c) rapidly, only occasionally 
producing “explosive and spectacular” events. Most climate 
change impacts cannot be observed day-to-day, but they 
become (d) visible when we are confronted with their 
accumulated impacts.
Climate change evades our imagination because it poses 
significant representational challenges. It cannot be observed 
in “human time,” which is why documentary filmmaker Jeff 
Orlowski, who tracks climate change effects on glaciers and 
coral reefs, uses “before and after” photographs taken several 
months apart in the same place to (e) highlight changes that 
occurred gradually.
* anthropologist: 인류학자
** catastrophe: 큰 재해
*** evade: 피하다
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Differing Attitudes Towards Current Climate Issues
② Slow but Significant: The History of Ecological Movements
③ The Silence of Imagination in Representing Climate Change
④ Vivid Threats: Climate Disasters Spreading in Local Areas
⑤ The Rise and Fall of Environmentalism and Ecocriticism
42. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 
것은? [3점]
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Walking out of Charing Cross Station in London, Emilia 
and her traveling companion, Layla, already felt their hearts 
pounding. It was the second day of their European summer 
trip. They were about to visit one of the world’s most famous 
art galleries. The two of them started hurrying with 
excitement. Suddenly, Emilia shouted, “Look! There it is! 
We’re finally at the National Gallery!” Layla laughed and 
responded, “(a) Your dream’s finally come true!”
(B)
“Don’t lose hope yet! Which gallery is the special exhibition 
at?” Layla asked. Emilia responded, “Well, his Sunflowers is 
still in England, but it’s at a gallery in Liverpool. That’s a long 
way, isn’t it?” After a quick search on her phone, Layla stated, 
“No! It’s only two hours to Liverpool by train. The next train 
leaves in an hour. Why don’t we take it?” After considering the 
idea, Emilia, now relieved, responded, “Yeah, but (b) you 
always wanted to see Rembrandt’s paintings. Let’s do that first, 
Layla! Then, after lunch, we can catch the next train.” Layla 
smiled brightly.
(C)
However, after searching all the exhibition rooms, Emilia 
and Layla couldn’t find van Gogh’s masterpiece anywhere. 
“That’s weird. Van Gogh’s Sunflowers should be here. Where 
is it?” Emilia looked upset, but Layla kept calm and said, 
“Maybe (c) you’ve missed a notice about it. Check the 
National Gallery app.” Emilia checked it quickly. Then, she 
sighed, “Sunflowers isn’t here! It’s been lent to a different 
gallery for a special exhibition. (d) I can’t believe I didn’t 
check!”
(D)
Upon entering the National Gallery, Emilia knew exactly 
where to go first. (e) She grabbed Layla’s hand and dragged her 
hurriedly to find van Gogh’s Sunflowers. It was Emilia’s 
favorite painting and had inspired her to become a painter. 
Emilia loved his use of bright colors and light. She couldn’t wait 
to finally see his masterpiece in person. “It’ll be amazing to see 
how he communicated the feelings of isolation and loneliness in 
his work,” she said eagerly.
43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
가장 적절한 것은?
① (B) － (D) － (C)
② (C) － (B) － (D)
③ (C) － (D) － (B)
④ (D) － (B) － (C)
⑤ (D) － (C) － (B)
44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e) 중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
것은?
① (a)
② (b)
③ (c)
④ (d)
⑤ (e)
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은 것은?
① Emilia와 Layla는 유럽 여행 중이었다.
② Layla는 Emilia에게 Liverpool로 가자고 제안했다.
③ Emilia는 기차를 점심 식사 전에 타자고 말했다.
④ National Gallery에는 van Gogh의 Sunflowers가 없었다.
⑤ Emilia는 van Gogh의 Sunflowers를 좋아했다.
* 확인 사항
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.
